Origin
The Muzaffarid dynasty of Gujarat was founded by Zafar Khan, who was later titled Muzaffar Shah I. According to various historical sources and scholarism, Zafar Khan was of indigenous Indian origins.
The Muzaffarid dynasty of Gujarat was founded by Zafar Khan, who was later titled Muzaffar Shah I. According to various historical sources and scholarism, Zafar Khan was of indigenous Indian origins. There have been various claims from medieval to modern historians about their origin. Modern historians such as André Wink and S.C. Misra, and others claim that Zafar Khan hailed from the Tank (Persian tāk or tānk) subdivision of the Khatri caste, originally from Punjab, though he was born in Delhi.
However, some historians such as Aparna Kapadia offer a more nuanced account, asserting that Sahāran (also spelled Sadhāran), the father of Zafar Khan, was a Tank Rajput who originally lived in Thanesar in present-day Haryana. There have been other historians who also suggest the Tanks were of Rajput origin. Though, Kapadia also highlights that the Gujarati historian Sikandar recounts that the Tanks were once Hindu Khatris who were expelled from their original community due to adopting the habit of wine drinking.Meanwhile, some scholars interpret the Tank Rajputs as likely considered a lower or ignoble class of Rajputs, as suggested by Misra.
In contrast, some other historians, such as Richard M. Eaton, describe Zafar Khan simply as the son of a "peasant convert to Islam," while historians like V.K. Agnihotri and Saiyid Athar Abbas Rizvi identify Sadhāran as a Jat convert to Islam rather than Rajput or Khatri.
Based on the work of 17th century writers of medieval India, historian Iqtidar Hussain Siddiqui describes Sadharan to be of the "Kalal" caste. They described his sons as founders of regional dynasties of Gujarat and Nagaur. Their accounts also provide information about how some Hindus were converted to Islam including those attracted by Muslim elites. One of his sons Zafar Khan founded Muzzafarid dynasty and his other son Shams Khan Dandani was the founder of the principality of Nagaur.
Medieval historians have described the Muzaffarids with having Kalal origin. They identify Zafar Khan’s family with the Kalal tribe, traditionally a wine-brewing and selling caste. Medieval historians like Ibn Battuta and Ziauddin Barani, who lived between 13th and 14th century mentioned their origin as Khumars or vinteners in Persian. Later, medieval historians described them with their Hindustani name, Kalal. Various modern historians including Kiran Pawar and Shauqat Ali Khan have mentioned their origin to be of Kalal tribe based on these sources. The Kalals were originally non-Muslim and their conversion to Islam is linked to a marriage alliance between Sahāran's sister and Sultan Firoz Shah Tughlaq, which facilitated the family’s rise in status and influence.