History
The Baháʼí House of Worship was first mentioned under the name Mashriqu'l-Adhkár (مشرق الاذكار; Arabic for "Dawning-place of the remembrance of God") in the Kitáb-i-Aqdas, the book of laws of Baháʼu'lláh, founder of the Baháʼí Faith. Baháʼu'lláh wrote:
O people of the world!
The Baháʼí House of Worship was first mentioned under the name Mashriqu'l-Adhkár (مشرق الاذكار; Arabic for "Dawning-place of the remembrance of God") in the Kitáb-i-Aqdas, the book of laws of Baháʼu'lláh, founder of the Baháʼí Faith. Baháʼu'lláh wrote:
O people of the world! Build ye houses of worship throughout the lands in the name of Him Who is the Lord of all religions. Make them as perfect as is possible in the world of being, and adorn them with that which befitteth them, not with images and effigies. Then, with radiance and joy, celebrate therein the praise of your Lord, the Most Compassionate.
The first Baháʼí House of Worship, in what is now Turkmenistan, was planned during the lifetime of Baháʼu'lláh and then designed and constructed during the ministry of his son and successor, ʻAbdu'l-Bahá. It was completed in 1919 but later expropriated from the Baháʼís and eventually demolished. The cornerstone of the first Baháʼí House of Worship that is still standing, in the United States, was laid in 1912 by ʻAbdu'l-Bahá, and the House of Worship was dedicated in 1953 during the ministry of his grandson and successor, Shoghi Effendi.
Also in 1953, Shoghi Effendi announced a long-term plan to build a temple for each (roughly) continental region. These temples are referred to as "Mother temples" or continental temples and are intended as the first of many temples in their regions. Shoghi Effendi died in 1957, but his plans for the construction of Baháʼí Houses of Worship were continued by the Universal House of Justice, a body first elected in 1963 that has led the world Baháʼí community since that time. The Universal House of Justice has included constructing Houses of Worship in the goals of some of its teaching plans. By the end of the twentieth century, further continental Houses of Worship were completed in Uganda, Australia, Germany, Panama, Samoa, and India. In 2001, the Universal House of Justice wrote in its Ridván Message to the Baháʼís of the world that "with profound thankfulness and joy ... we announce at this auspicious moment the decision to proceed" with the construction in Chile of the eighth and final continental House of Worship. It was completed in 2016.
Meanwhile, in the Ridván message of 2012, the Universal House of Justice announced the locations of the first local and national Baháʼí Houses of Worship that would be built. The first two national Houses of Worship would be in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Papua New Guinea, while the first five local Houses of Worship would be in Cambodia, India, Kenya, Colombia, and Vanuatu. Since the announcement, the two national Houses of Worship and four of the local Houses of Worship have been completed, and there has been a groundbreaking ceremony for the fifth local House of Worship. In addition, more than 120 national Baháʼí communities have now acquired properties for the eventual construction of Baháʼí Houses of Worship, compared to 84 national communities that had done so by 1988.