Characteristics
Baroque architecture often used visual and theatrical effects, designed to amaze and awe the viewer:
domes were a common feature. Their interiors were often painted with a sky filled with angels and sculpted sunbeams, suggesting glory or a vision of heaven.
Baroque architecture often used visual and theatrical effects, designed to amaze and awe the viewer:
domes were a common feature. Their interiors were often painted with a sky filled with angels and sculpted sunbeams, suggesting glory or a vision of heaven. Pear-shaped domes were sometimes used in the Bavarian, Czech, Polish and Ukrainian Baroque
quadratura. Paintings in trompe-l'œil of angels and saints in the dome and on the ceiling, combined with stucco frames or decoration, which give the illusion of three dimensions, and of looking through the ceiling to the heavens. Sometimes painted or sculpted figures of Atlantes appear to be holding up the ceiling. In some Baroque churches, illusionistic ceiling painting gave the illusion of three dimensions.
grand stairways. Stairways often occupied a central place and were used for dramatic effect. winding upwards in stages, giving changing views from different levels, serving as a setting for ceremonies.
cartouche in elaborate forms and sculpted frames break up the surfaces and add three-dimensional effects to the walls.
mirrors to give the impression of depth and greater space, particularly when combined with windows, as in the Hall of Mirrors at the Palace of Versailles.
incomplete architectural elements, such as frontons with sections missing, causing sections to merge and disorienting the eye.
chiaroscuro. Use of strong contrasts of darkness and light for dramatic effect.
overhead sculpture. Putti or figures on or just below the ceiling, made of wood (often gilded), plaster or stucco, marble or faux finishing, giving the impression of floating in the air.
Solomonic columns, which gave an illusion of motion.
elliptical or oval spaces, eliminating right angles. Sometimes an oval nave was surrounded by radiating circular chapels. This was a distinctive feature of the Basilica of the Fourteen Holy Helpers of Balthasar Neumann.