Modern era
The Red Fort, the largest monument in New Delhi, is one of its most popular tourist destinations and attracts thousands of visitors every year. It is a monument of national significance; each year on India's independence day, observed on August 15, the Prime Minister hoists the national flag at the Red Fort and delivers a speech from its ramparts, which is broadcast nationwide.
The Red Fort, the largest monument in New Delhi, is one of its most popular tourist destinations and attracts thousands of visitors every year. It is a monument of national significance; each year on India's independence day, observed on August 15, the Prime Minister hoists the national flag at the Red Fort and delivers a speech from its ramparts, which is broadcast nationwide. The fort also appears on the back of the ₹500 note of the Mahatma Gandhi New Series of the Indian rupee.
The Red Fort's architectural features are in varying states of preservation. While some structures remain relatively intact, retaining their original decorative elements, others have suffered significant damage, with inlaid marble floral designs removed by looters. The water features, once extensive, are now dry. The tea house, though not preserved in its historical form, functions as a working restaurant. The mosque and the hammam (public baths) are closed to visitors, who can only view them through glass windows or marble latticework. Walkways within the complex are deteriorating, and public toilets are available both at the entrance and inside the premises. The Lahori Gate serves as the main entrance, leading to a shopping area with jewelry and craft stores. The complex also houses a museum of "blood paintings," which narrate the stories of 20th-century Indian martyrs, alongside an archaeological museum and an Indian war-memorial museum.
2000 terrorist attack
The Red Fort was the site of a terrorist attack on 22 December 2000, carried out by six Lashkar-e-Taiba operatives. Two soldiers and a civilian were murdered in what the news media described as an attempt to derail the then-ongoing India-Pakistan peace talks.
Security
To ensure security and prevent terrorist attacks, stringent measures are implemented around the Red Fort on the eve of the Indian Independence Day. Delhi Police and paramilitary forces maintain a vigilant presence in the neighbourhoods surrounding the fort, while National Security Guard sharpshooters are strategically stationed on high-rises near the site. The airspace around the fort is a designated no-fly zone during the celebration, and safe houses exist in the vicinity to which the prime minister and other dignitaries can be taken to in the event of an attack.
Adoption controversy
In April 2018, the Dalmia Bharat Group adopted the Red Fort for maintenance, development, and operations under the government's "Adopt A Heritage" scheme, through a contract worth ₹25 crores for a period of five years. A memorandum of understanding was signed with the ministries of Tourism and Culture and the Archaeological Survey of India. The adoption of the Red Fort by a private entity sparked outcry and widespread debate, drawing criticism from the public, historians, and political parties. The move also led to the trending of the hashtag #IndiaOnSale on Twitter. In May 2018, the Indian National Congress demanded the suspension of the agreement until an "impartial review" could be conducted by the Central Advisory Board of Archaeology or another recognized body of experts.
2021 Indian farmers' Republic Day protest
On 26 January 2021, during the 2021 Indian farmers' Republic Day protest, a coterie of protesting farmers breached the fort, hoisted religious flags from its ramparts, and scaled the domes of the fort. One of the farmers was witnessed climbing a flagpole in front of the fort and hoisting the Nishan Sahib pennant on the flagpole. The fort sustained damage owing to clashes between the protestors and the police and was vacated following police announcements.
Discoloration of the Red Fort
Since the late 20th century, the monument has been affected by environmental pollution which has turned the Red Fort's color from red to black. According to recent Italo-Indian studies in September 2025, repeated events of air pollution has contributed to the formation of tarry black crusts forming on the Red Fort's walls. These black crusts are caused by pollutants, including particulate matter, nitrogen dioxide, sulfur dioxide, carbon monoxide, and toxic metals, such as lead, copper and zinc.