Other Houses of Worship
Completed but destroyed
The first Baháʼí House of Worship was built in the city of Ashgabat, which was then a part of Russia's Transcaspian Oblast and is now the capital of Turkmenistan. It was started in 1902 and mostly completed by 1907, but was not fully finished until 1919.
Completed but destroyed
The first Baháʼí House of Worship was built in the city of Ashgabat, which was then a part of Russia's Transcaspian Oblast and is now the capital of Turkmenistan. It was started in 1902 and mostly completed by 1907, but was not fully finished until 1919. Plans for this House of Worship were first made during the lifetime of Baháʼu'lláh. The design was prepared by Ustad Ali-Akbar Banna, and after his death the construction was supervised by Vakílu'd-Dawlih. In 1928, the House of Worship was expropriated by the Soviet authorities and thereafter it was leased back to the Baháʼís. This arrangement lasted until 1938, when it was fully secularized and turned into an art gallery. The 1948 Ashgabat earthquake seriously damaged the building, rendering it unsafe; the heavy rains of the following years weakened the structure, until in 1963 the building was demolished and the site was converted into a public park.
The Ashgabat House of Worship was surrounded by gardens with nine ponds. At the four corners of the plot of land surrounding the House of Worship were various buildings: a boys' school; a girls' school; a large meeting hall; and a group of buildings including the offices of the Local Spiritual Assembly, a reading room, and a room for meeting with enquirers.
Completed and standing
The Battambang, Cambodia temple was the world's first local Baháʼí House of Worship to be completed. The temple was designed by Cambodian architect Sochet Vitou Tang, who is a practicing Buddhist, and integrates distinctive Cambodian architectural principles. A dedication ceremony and official opening conference took place on 1–2 September 2017, attended by Cambodian dignitaries, locals, and representatives of Baháʼí communities throughout southeast Asia.
The temple in Agua Azul in the municipality of Villa Rica, Cauca Department, Colombia was the second local Baháʼí House of Worship to be completed in the world. The temple design, by architect Julian Gutierrez Chacón, was inspired by the shape of the cocoa seed, which was integral to the local culture before the arrival of the sugar cane industry. An opening dedication ceremony took place on 22 July 2018, followed by devotional services in the House of Worship.
A local Baháʼí House of Worship was opened on 23 May 2021 in Matunda Soy, Kenya.
On 13 November 2021, a local Baháʼí House of Worship opened near the town of Lenakel on the island of Tanna, Vanuatu.
The world's first national Baháʼí House of Worship, located in Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the Congo, was dedicated and opened its doors on 25 March 2023.
A national Baháʼí House of Worship in Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea was dedicated on 25 May 2024.
Planned
In 2021, groundbreaking ceremony took place for a local Baháʼí House of Worship in Hargawan near Bihar Sharif, India. The design for the temple near Bihar Sharif, created by architect Amritha Ballal, was shortlisted for the 2022 World Architecture Festival.
In April 2023, the Universal House of Justice announced plans for three further Houses of Worship: local Houses of Worship in Nepal and Zambia and a national House of Worship in Canada.
In October 2024, the Universal House of Justice announced plans for another three Houses of Worship: a local House of Worship in Batouri, Cameroon and national Houses of Worship in Brasília, Brazil and Lilongwe, Malawi.
In April 2025, the Universal House of Justice announced plans for a national House of Worship to be built in Manila, Philippines.
A site was selected and purchased in 1932 for a Baháʼí House of Worship in Hadiqa, northeast of Tehran, Iran. Charles Mason Remey provided a design for this temple which Shoghi Effendi then approved. A drawing of the design was published in an issue of The Baháʼí World. To date, however, the construction of this temple has not been possible.
Similarly, a design was created for a Baháʼí House of Worship near Mount Carmel in Haifa, Israel. It was created by Charles Mason Remey and approved by Shoghi Effendi in 1952. A photo of the model of the Haifa House of Worship can be found in an issue of The Baháʼí World. An obelisk marks the site where the House of Worship is to be built, but as of 2010, plans for constructing this House of Worship have not been made.