Economy
Mumbai, sometimes described as the "New York City of India", is the country's most populous city and its financial and commercial capital, generating 6.16% of the total GDP. It generates 19.8% of the GDP of Maharashtra (34.4% if the Thane district is included).
Mumbai, sometimes described as the "New York City of India", is the country's most populous city and its financial and commercial capital, generating 6.16% of the total GDP. It generates 19.8% of the GDP of Maharashtra (34.4% if the Thane district is included). It serves as an economic hub of India: as of 2006, Mumbai contributed 10% of the nation's factory employment, 25% of industrial output, 33% of income tax collections, 60% of customs duty collections, 20% of central excise tax collections, 40% of foreign trade, and ₹40 billion (equivalent to ₹130 billion or US$1.5 billion in 2023) in corporate taxes. Along with the rest of India, Mumbai has witnessed an economic boom since the liberalisation of 1991, the finance boom in the mid-nineties, and the information technology, export, services, and outsourcing boom in the 2000s.
Estimates of the 2017–18 economy of the Mumbai Metropolitan Region ranged from $368 billion to $400 billion (PPP & metro GDP), making it either the most or second most-productive metro area of India. Many of India's numerous conglomerates (including Larsen & Toubro, State Bank of India (SBI), Life Insurance Corporation of India (LIC), Tata Group, Godrej and Reliance), and five of the Fortune Global 500 companies are based in Mumbai. This is facilitated by the presence of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), the Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE), the National Stock Exchange of India (NSE), and financial sector regulators such as the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI).
Until the 1970s, Mumbai owed its prosperity largely to textile mills and the seaport, but the local economy has since then diversified to include finance, engineering, diamond-polishing, healthcare, and information technology.
The key sectors contributing to the city's economy are: finance, gems & jewellery, leather processing, IT and ITES, textiles, petrochemical, electronics manufacturing, automobiles, and entertainment. Nariman Point and Bandra Kurla Complex (BKC) are Mumbai's major financial centres.
State and central government employees comprise a large percentage of the city's workforce. Mumbai also has a large unskilled and semi-skilled self-employed population, who primarily earn their livelihood as hawkers, taxi drivers, mechanics, and other such blue collar professions. The port and shipping industry is well established, with Mumbai Port being one of India's oldest and most significant ports. Dharavi, in central Mumbai, has an increasingly large recycling industry, processing recyclable waste from other parts of the city; the district has an estimated 15,000 single-room factories.
As of 2024, Mumbai is home to the third-highest number of billionaires of any city in the world. With a total wealth of around $960 billion, it is the wealthiest Indian city and one of the richest cities in the world. As of 2008, the Globalization and World Cities Research Network has ranked Mumbai as an "alpha world city", third in its categories of Global cities. Mumbai is the third most expensive office market in the world, and was ranked among the fastest cities in the country for business startup in 2009.
Poverty, inequality, and the cost of living
Despite having the largest concentration of billionaires out of any city in Asia, Mumbai is one of the most unequal cities in the world. 41.8% of the city's population live in urban slums, though slums occupy just around 7% of the city's total land area.
Mumbai suffers from the same major urbanisation problems seen in many fast-growing cities in developing countries: poverty and unemployment. With available land at a premium, Mumbai residents often reside in cramped, relatively expensive housing, usually far from workplaces, and therefore require long commutes on crowded mass transit or clogged roadways. Many live close to bus or train stations, although suburban residents spend significant time travelling southward to the central commercial district. Mumbai's overall per capita residential area is 8.3 square metres, and in the city's slums, it is 2.73 square metres.
According to a paper published in 2010 by the World Bank, the median income was ₹20,000 while the average was ₹40,000. By 2019, the overall average salary in Mumbai was ₹45,000. Meanwhile, the median rental cost of a one-bedroom apartment in Mumbai proper is around ₹30,000. Much of the city's population lives paycheck to paycheck.