Architecture
Ahmedabad was founded on 26 February 1411, far from the Muslim rule in Delhi. This allowed for Ahmedabad to develop its own provincial style of architecture.
Ahmedabad was founded on 26 February 1411, far from the Muslim rule in Delhi. This allowed for Ahmedabad to develop its own provincial style of architecture. Ahmedabad's provincial style of architecture is commonly named Gujarat style, in accordance to the name of the province. The Gujarat style of architecture, and thus Ahmedabad's style of architecture, is a mix of Indo-Islamic and traditional Hindu temple architectural elements. Although the Gujarat style flourished during the 15th century and afterwards, the Māru-Gurjara style, from the 11th to 13th centuries, was a precedent for the Gujarat Islamic architecture style since Islam had been present in Gujarat a century before Ahmed Shah I rose to power and founded Ahmedabad. The early mosques in Gujarat during the pre-Ahmed Shah period were created from mostly pillaged temple material that was turned into mosque-like structures.
The Jama Masjid is one of many examples of the Gujarat style of architecture in Ahmedabad. The monuments in and around the old city fall roughly into two categories. The first category is associated with Ahmad Shah I during the first half of the 15th century and the second being associated with Mahmud Begada for the second half of the 15th century and beyond. Built with yellow sandstone, the mosque complex is centred on a large rectangular courtyard 75 metres (246 ft) long and 66 metres (217 ft) wide. One enters the court by three entrances: south, east, and north. One at the centre of each side. The primary entrance is the south facing entrance; the eastern porched entrance leads out to another enclosure, the tomb of Sultan Ahmad Shah I. The courtyard is lined with a colonnade on three sides, the prayer hall occupies the western side. In the centre of the courtyard is a rectangular basin for ablutions.
The southern porch entrance to the mosque is large and supported by pillars, some of which were reused from Hindu or Jain temples. The porch is elavated with twelve steps on each side. It is topped by a roof that once had a dome which has since collapsed. In its Indo-Muslim architecture, the mosque also contains many syncretic elements not necessarily obvious to the viewer: some of the central domes are carved like lotus flowers, closely related to the typical domes of Jain temples; and some of the pillars are carved with the form of a bell hanging on a chain, in reference to the bells that often hang in Hindu temples.
Prayer hall
The prayer room is rectangular and covered by fifteen domes. The roof of the prayer room is arranged on three levels. The main prayer hall has about 260 closely set columns supporting the roof, with its 15 domes, making a walk through the hall a beautiful maze of light and shadows. The wide-open courtyard, floored with white marble, is ringed by a colonnade painted with giant Arabic calligraphy, and has a tank for ritual ablutions in the centre. The mosque and arcades are built of yellow sandstone and carved with the intricate detail that mosques of this period are known for. The main prayer hall space is divided into fifteen bays, or three rows of five square bays, each with a dome thus totaling 15 domes. The cupola dome in the centre is higher than the rest. The central nave of the prayer area is three stories tall.
The mosque has, in total, five mihrabs that correspond with the aforementioned five square bays of the main prayer hall. The five mihrabs run along the Qibla wall. The Qibla wall faces the west and is decorated with colored marble together with its mihrabs. A white marble crescent marks the spot where the imam leads the prayer. Pierced stone screens (the 'Jalis') are placed between the two pillars of the central openings.
Minarets
The main entrance is framed by two columns. They are the remains of two minarets (the 'shaking minarets') destroyed by the earthquakes of 1819 and 1956. In the earthquake of 1819, the lofty minarets were reduced to half their height and became known as the "shaking minarets". The earthquake of 1956 destroyed the remaining "shaking minarets".