Outside the Indian subcontinent
Indonesia
In Indonesia. Surya (Indonesian: Batara Surya) was adapted into Indonesian culture as the god who rules the sun, and was given the title "Batara".
Indonesia
In Indonesia. Surya (Indonesian: Batara Surya) was adapted into Indonesian culture as the god who rules the sun, and was given the title "Batara". Batara Surya is famous for giving his heirlooms or gifts to the people he chooses. This god is famous for having many children from various women, among them from Dewi Kunti in the Mahabharata who gave birth to Adipati Karna.
Batara Surya was hit when Anoman blamed Batara Surya for what happened to his mother, Dewi Anjani and her grandmother, who had been cursed by her husband. Anoman feels Batara Surya must be responsible so Anoman with his magic collects clouds from all over the world to cover the natural world so that the rays of the sun cannot reach the earth. Fortunately, this incident can be resolved amicably so that Anoman voluntarily removes the clouds again so that the natural world is exposed to the sun again. Surya has three queens namely Saranyu (also called Saraniya, Saranya, Sanjna, or Sangya), Ragyi, and Prabha. Saranyu is the mother of Vaiwaswata Manu (seventh Manu, the present day), and twins Yama (god of death) and his sister Yami. She also bore him the twins known as Aswin, and the gods. Saranyu, unable to witness the bright light from Surya, created a clone of herself named Chaya, and orders her to act as Surya's wife during her absence. Chaya had two sons by Surya-Sawarni Manu (the eighth Manu, the next) and Sani (the god of the planet Saturn), and two daughters-Tapti and Vishti. Batara Surya also had a son, Rewanta, or Raiwata, from Ragyi. Interestingly, Surya's two sons – Sani and Yama – are responsible for judging humans' lives, after death. Sani gives the results of one's actions through one's life through appropriate punishments and rewards, while Yama gives the results of one's actions after death.
In the Ramayana, Surya is mentioned as the father of King Sugriva, who helped Rama and Lakshmana in defeating King Ravana. He also trains Hanoman as his teacher. In the Mahabharata, Kunti receives a mantra from a sage, Durvasa; if spoken, he will be able to summon every god and bear children by him. Believing in the power of this spell, Kunti unwittingly has summoned Surya, but when Surya appears, she gets scared and demands him to return. However, Surya has an obligation to fulfill the spell before returning. Surya miraculously made Dewi Kunti to give birth to a child, while maintaining her virginity so that she, as an unmarried princess, would not have to face any shame or be the target of questions from society. Kunti feels compelled to leave behind her son, Karna, who grows up to be one of the central characters in the great war of Kurukshetra.
Worshiping Shiva Raditya in Bali
In the Puranas in Bali, Batara Surya is the most intelligent student of Shiva, so that Surya was given the title Surya Raditya and used as an example to find out the intelligence or supernatural power of Shiva, and as a thank you from Batara Surya, Shiva was given an honorary title by the name of Batara Guru, because he is the teacher of the Gods. There are others who argue, however, that in the transformation of the Puranas which is the interpretation of the maharsi on the Vedic chess book, it was Dewa Surya who later turned into Ludra, who was finally called Shiva, so that in worship chants it is often called the term Shiva Aditya.
In the concept of Gama Bali there is a Pelinggih named Pelinggih Surya or Padmasana, which is a place to worship Shiva who manifests as Shiva Raditya or the sun god. In the Yayur Veda there are several special rituals for the Sulinggih who worship God in the morning in its manifestation as the Surya Batara, namely those that come from Surya Sewana or Surya Namaskar which means worshiping the Surya Batara. In the Panca Sembah mantra, there is also a special mantra aimed at Shiva Raditya. According to the general view, Batara Surya is worshiped because he is a witness to life and he is the best student of Lord Shiva, so he was given the title Hyang Siwa Raditya ("Surya student of Lord Shiva"). The importance of Dewa Surya in Bali can be seen from the existence of Sanggah Surya, which must always be present at every Yadnya ceremony in Bali. and this is poured in several Balinese literary manuscripts, one of which is the Bhama Kertih Lontar.