Excavations
The site of Sheri Khan Tarakai was discovered in 1985 by members of the Bannu Archaeological Project, and it is the oldest known village settlement in the Bannu region. Archaeological excavations were carried out at the site for five seasons between 1986 and 1990.
The site of Sheri Khan Tarakai was discovered in 1985 by members of the Bannu Archaeological Project, and it is the oldest known village settlement in the Bannu region. Archaeological excavations were carried out at the site for five seasons between 1986 and 1990.
Bannu Archaeological Project
The Bannu Archaeological Project was a collaboration involving the Pakistan Heritage Society, University College London, The British Museum, Bryn Mawr College and the University of Cambridge. The Project explored in Bannu District, North-West Frontier Province, Pakistan between 1985 and 2001. Numerous Early Historic and Later Prehistoric sites were discovered.
The Project established that Sheri Khan Tarakai is actually the second oldest village farming settlement in south Asia.
Lewan settlement
Between 1995 and 2001, the project also explored the Chalcolithic site of Lewan, Bannu. This site was occupied in both the Tochi-Gomal and Kot Diji phases, so it's important for understanding the rise of complex societies in the NWFP in late prehistory.
Both the radiocarbon chronology and the material assemblage indicate that Lewan was continuously occupied throughout the fourth and third millennia (4000-2000 BC). The range of industrial activities recorded here suggests that it was a village settlement comparable to those at Tarakai Qila, Tarakai Ghundai and Islam Chowki - all in Bannu Basin area.
There's evidence of bead manufacture, and pottery production at the site—similar to all other sites of this period in the Bannu basin.
Akra, Bannu
The Early Historic site of Akra, Bannu was also explored. The site covers some 80 hectares and is the largest archaeological site in the Bannu area. The site was first occupied around 2000 BC, and may have continued to be inhabited until the 11th century AD.