Course
The river arises at Talakaveri in Kodagu district of Karnataka. The source of the river is located at an altitude of 1,341 m (4,400 ft) in the Brahmagiri Hills of the Western Ghats.
The river arises at Talakaveri in Kodagu district of Karnataka. The source of the river is located at an altitude of 1,341 m (4,400 ft) in the Brahmagiri Hills of the Western Ghats. Its follows a rough upper course consisting of rocky beds and high banks. Once it leaves the Kodagu hills, it flows eastwards and forms a series of rapids and falls. It flows through a narrow gorge onto the Deccan plateau and drops about 18–24 m (59–79 ft) at Chunchanakatte Falls. The river forms the island of Srirangapatna and widens to 900–1,200 ft (270–370 m) before flowing south-east. At Shivanasamudra, the river drops 91 m (299 ft) and forms the Shivanasamudra Falls, one of the largest waterfalls in the country. After forming the island of Shivanasamudra, the river converges and passes through the Mekedatu gorge. After flowing for 320 km (200 mi) in Karnataka, the river flows for about 64 km (40 mi) along the Karnataka-Tamil Nadu border.
The river enters Tamil Nadu and forms the Hogenakkal Falls. After the falls, the river flows southwards towards Mettur Dam and joins its main right bank tributary Bhavani at Kooduthurai. The river flows eastwards through Erode and Karur, and widens further before entering the Tiruchirappalli district. It splits into two branches with the northern part called as Kollidam River and the southern part of the river retaining the name Kaveri. After flowing for 16 km (9.9 mi), the two branches converge around the Srirangam island. The river further branches off into 36 different channels before emptying into the Bay of Bengal near Poompuhar in Mayiladuthurai district. The river traverses for about 416 km (258 mi) in Tamil Nadu for a total length of about 800 km (500 mi).
Tributaries
The Kaveri River has 21 major tributaries. The largest tributary Hemavati, and Lakshmana Tirtha join the river at Krishna Raja Sagara. Kabini is another major contributor to the flow of Kaveri and joins the river in Karnataka. It meets with its second largest tributary Bhavani at Kooduthurai in Bhavani and two other tributaries Noyyal, and Amaravati join further down the stream in Tamil Nadu. Other tributaries of Kaveri include Shimsha, Arkavati, Sarabanga, and Thirumanimutharu.
Discharge
Source: