History
Emperor Shah Jahan commissioned the construction of the Red Fort on 12 May 1639, following his decision to shift his capital from Agra to Delhi. The design of the Red Fort is attributed to the architect Ustad Ahmad Lahori, renowned for his work on the Taj Mahal.
Emperor Shah Jahan commissioned the construction of the Red Fort on 12 May 1639, following his decision to shift his capital from Agra to Delhi. The design of the Red Fort is attributed to the architect Ustad Ahmad Lahori, renowned for his work on the Taj Mahal. It straddles the Yamuna River, which once fed the moats surrounding most of the walls. Construction began in the sacred Islamic month of Muharram, on 13 May 1638. Supervised by Shah Jahan, it was completed on 6 April 1648. The fort was originally adorned in red and white. Unlike other Mughal forts, the Red Fort's boundary walls are asymmetrical to contain and subsume the older Salimgarh Fort. The fortress-palace served as the centrepiece of Shahjahanabad, the city now known as Old Delhi. Shah Jahan's successor, Emperor Aurangzeb, enhanced the Red Fort by adding the Moti Masjid (Pearl Mosque) to the emperor's private quarters. He also constructed barbicans in front of the two main gates to create a more circuitous approach to the palace.
Following the death of Emperor Aurangzeb, the administrative and fiscal structure of the Mughal dynasty experienced decline, leading to the degeneration of the palace during the 18th century. In 1712, Jahandar Shah was crowned the Mughal Emperor. Within a year of beginning his rule, Shah was murdered and replaced by Farrukhsiyar. In 1739, the Persian emperor Nadir Shah decisively defeated the Mughal army, despite its considerable strength of approximately 200,000 soldiers. Following his victory, he plundered the Red Fort, seizing its treasures, including the legendary Peacock Throne. After three months, Nadir Shah returned to Persia. His invasion left the city significantly damaged, and the Mughal Empire, under the next Mughal emperor Muhammad Shah's reign, was severely weakened. The internal weaknesses of the Mughal Empire reduced the Mughals to titular rulers of Delhi. A treaty signed in 1752 established the Marathas as the protectors of the throne in Delhi. The 1758 Maratha victory over the Afghans at Sirhind, followed by their defeat at Panipat, catapulted them into further conflict with Ahmad Shah Durrani.
In 1760, the Marathas stripped and melted the silver ceiling of the Diwan-i-Khas to raise funds for the defence of Delhi from the armies of Ahmed Shah Durrani. In 1761, after the Marathas lost the third battle of Panipat, Delhi was raided by Durrani. Ten years later, the Marathas, acting at the behest of the exiled Emperor Shah Alam II, recaptured Delhi from the Rohilla Afghans. Mahadaji Shinde, the commander of the Maratha Army, restored Shah Alam II to the throne.
In 1764, the Jat ruler of Bharatpur, Maharaja Jawahar Singh, attacked Delhi, and eventually captured the Red Fort of Delhi on 5 February 1765. Two days later, after exacting tribute from the Mughals, the Jats withdrew their forces from the Red Fort, seizing the Mughal throne. The throne now adorns the palace at Deeg, serving as a historical centrepiece. The doors of the fort are located in the Lohagarh Fort of Bharatpur.
In 1783, Sikh Misls led by Jassa Singh Ahluwalia, Jassa Singh Ramgarhia, and Baghel Singh Dhaliwal conquered Delhi and the Red Fort. With a consolidated force consisting of 40,000 troops, they looted the area spanning from Awadh to Jodhpur. After negotiations, the Sikh forces agreed to withdraw from Delhi and reinstate the Mughal emperor Shah Alam II. As a condition of their retreat, the Jats stipulated the construction of seven Sikh gurdwaras in Delhi, including the Gurudwara Sis Ganj Sahib in Chandni Chowk.
In 1788, the grandson of Najibkhan, Rohilla, Ghulam Kadir, looted Delhi and killed female members of the Mughal royal family. He also imprisoned Emperor Shah Alam II. Upon learning this, Mahadaji Shinde sent his men to free Shah Alam and pursue Kadir, who was hiding in Ghosgad in Rohilkhand. Kadir was eventually apprehended and beheaded. As a result of this, the Maratha flag was allowed to be hung from the Red Fort until 1803.
During the Second Anglo-Maratha War, the forces of the East India Company defeated the Maratha troops led by Daulat Rao Scindia in the Battle of Delhi; this event marked the end of Maratha control over Delhi and their authority over the Red Fort. After the battle, the British East India Company took over the administration of Mughal territories and installed a Resident at the Red Fort. The last Mughal emperor to occupy the fort, Bahadur Shah II, became a symbol of the 1857 rebellion against the British East India Company, in which the residents of Shahjahanabad participated.
Despite its position as the seat of Mughal power and its defensive capabilities, the Red Fort was not a site of any engagements during the 1857 uprising against the British. After the rebellion was subdued, Bahadur Shah II left the fort on 17 September and was subsequently apprehended by British forces. Bahadur Shah Zafar II returned to Red Fort as a British prisoner, was tried in 1858, and was exiled to Rangoon on 7 October that year. After the conclusion of the rebellion, the British sacked the Red Fort before ordering its systematic demolition. As a result of this widespread destruction, 80% of the fort's structures were demolished, including the stone screen that once connected the pavilions along the river-facing façade of the fort. All furniture was either removed or destroyed; the harem apartments, servants' quarters, and gardens were demolished, and a line of stone barracks was erected atop them. Only the marble buildings on the east side of the imperial enclosure escaped complete destruction, although they were damaged while demolition was underway. While the defensive walls and towers were relatively unscathed, over two-thirds of the inner structures were demolished.
Lord Curzon, who served as the Viceroy of India from 1899 to 1905, initiated restoration efforts for the Red Fort. These included the reconstruction of its walls and the revival of its gardens, complete with an updated watering system.
The majority of the jewels and artwork housed in the Red Fort were looted during Nadir Shah's invasion in 1747, and yet again in the aftermath of the Indian Rebellion of 1857. They were eventually sold to private collectors or the British Museum, the British Library, and the Victoria and Albert Museum. For instance, Shah Jahan's jade wine cup and Bahadur Shah II's crown, both looted, are currently held in London. Various requests for restitution have so far been rejected by the British Government.1911 witnessed the visit of King George V and Queen Mary for the Delhi Durbar. In anticipation of their visit, some buildings were restored. The Red Fort Archaeological Museum was moved from the drum house to the Mumtaz Mahal.
The INA trials, also known as the Red Fort Trials, refer to the court-martial of a number of officers of the Indian National Army. The first trial was conducted at the Red Fort between November and December 1945.
On 15 August 1947, the first prime minister of India, Jawaharlal Nehru, raised the Indian national flag above the Lahore Gate.
After Indian independence, the site experienced few changes, and the Red Fort continued to be used as a military cantonment. A significant portion of the Red Fort remained under the control of the Indian Army until 22 December 2003, when it was transferred to the Archaeological Survey of India for restoration and conservation. In 2009, the Comprehensive Conservation and Management Plan (CCMP), prepared by the Archaeological Survey of India under the auspices of a Supreme Court direction to revitalise the fort, was announced.
In recent years, several museums and galleries have been added to the Red Fort complex. Four of these museums, inaugurated in 2019, are housed in the colonial-era barracks within the complex. Barrack B1 is dedicated to the 1857 War of Independence, Barrack B2 commemorates the Jallianwala Bagh massacre, and Barrack B3 focuses on Subhas Chandra Bose and the Indian National Army movement. Barrack B4, known as Drishyakala, is a collaboration between the Archaeological Survey of India and the Delhi Art Gallery and showcases Indian art. The earlier museums, including the Indian Freedom Fighters' Museum, the Mumtaz Mahal Museum, and the Naubat Khana Museum, have been closed, with their exhibits relocated to these newly established museums.