Geography
Mumbai is on a narrow peninsula on the southwest of Salsette Island, which lies between the Arabian Sea to the west, Thane Creek to the east, and Vasai Creek to the north. Mumbai's suburban district occupies most of the island.
Mumbai is on a narrow peninsula on the southwest of Salsette Island, which lies between the Arabian Sea to the west, Thane Creek to the east, and Vasai Creek to the north. Mumbai's suburban district occupies most of the island. Navi Mumbai is east of Thane Creek, and Thane is north of Vasai Creek. Mumbai consists of two distinct regions: Mumbai City district and Mumbai Suburban district, which form two separate revenue districts of Maharashtra. The city district-region is also commonly referred to as the "Island City" or South Mumbai. The total area of Mumbai is 603.4 square kilometres (233.0 sq mi). Of this, the island city spans 67.79 square kilometres (26.17 sq mi), while the suburban district spans 370 square kilometres (140 sq mi), together accounting for 437.71 square kilometres (169.00 sq mi) under the administration of Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai (MCGM). The remaining areas belong to various defence establishments, the Mumbai Port Trust, the Atomic Energy Commission, and the Borivali National Park, which are out of the jurisdiction of the MCGM. The Mumbai Metropolitan Region which includes portions of Thane, Palghar and Raigad districts in addition to Greater Mumbai, covers an area of 4,355 square kilometres (1,681 sq mi).
Mumbai lies at the mouth of the Ulhas River on the western coast of India, in the coastal region known as the Konkan. It sits on Salsette Island (Sashti Island), which it partially shares with the Thane district. Mumbai is bounded by the Arabian Sea to the west. Many parts of the city lie just above sea level, with elevations ranging from 10 to 15 metres (33 to 49 ft). The city has an average elevation of 14 metres (46 ft). Northern Mumbai (Salsette) is hilly, and the highest point in the city is 450 metres (1,480 ft) at Salsette in the Powai–Kanheri ranges. The Sanjay Gandhi National Park (Borivali National Park) is situated partly in the Mumbai suburban district and partly in the Thane district, covering an area of 103.09 square kilometres (39.80 sq mi).
Apart from the Bhatsa Dam, six major lakes supply water to the city: Vihar Lake, Lower Vaitarna, Upper Vaitarna, Tulsi Lake, Tansa, and Powai Lake. Tulsi Lake and Vihar Lake are located within the city's limits in Borivali National Park. The supply from Powai Lake, also within the city limits, is used only for agricultural and industrial purposes. Three small rivers, the Dahisar River, Poisar River (or Poinsar River), and Oshiwara River (or Ohiwara River) originate within the park, while the Mithi River originates from Tulsi Lake and gathers water overflowing from Vihar and Powai Lakes. The coastline of the city is indented with numerous creeks and bays, stretching from the Thane creek in the east to Madh Marve on the western front. The eastern coast of Salsette Island is covered with large mangrove swamps, rich in biodiversity, while the western coast is mostly sandy and rocky.
Soil cover in the city region is predominantly sandy due to its proximity to the sea. In the suburbs, the soil cover is largely alluvial and loamy. The underlying rock of the region is composed of black Deccan basalt flows, and their acidic and basic variants date back to the late Cretaceous and early Eocene eras. Mumbai sits on a seismically active zone owing to the presence of 23 fault lines in the vicinity. The area is classified as a Seismic Zone III region, which means an earthquake of up to magnitude 6.5 on the Richter magnitude scale could occur.
Climate
Mumbai has an extreme tropical wet and dry climate (Aw) under the Köppen climate classification. However, the central and northern suburbs experience a tropical monsoon climate (Am) with even heavier rainfall during the wet season. Mumbai generally has a nearly rainless stretch from October to May, with its most intense rainfall occurring during the peak wet period in July. A cooler season from December to February is followed by a hotter season from March to May. The period from June to the end of September constitutes the southwest monsoon season, and October and November form the post-monsoon season.
Between June and September, the southwest monsoon rains occur in Mumbai. Pre-monsoon showers are received in May. Occasionally, north-east monsoon showers occur in October and November. The maximum annual rainfall ever recorded was 3,452 mm (136 in) for 1954. The most rainfall recorded in a single day was 944 mm (37 in) on 26 July 2005. The average total annual rainfall is 2,213.4 mm (87 in) for the Island City and 2,502.3 mm (99 in) for the suburbs.
The average annual temperature is 27 °C (81 °F), and the average annual precipitation is 2,213 mm (87 in). In the Island City, the average maximum temperature is 31 °C (88 °F), while the average minimum temperature is 24 °C (75 °F). In the suburbs, the daily mean maximum temperature range from 29 °C (84 °F) to 33 °C (91 °F), while the daily mean minimum temperature ranges from 16 °C (61 °F) to 26 °C (79 °F). The record high is 42.2 °C (108 °F) set on 14 April 1952, and the record low was 7.4 °C (45 °F), set on 27 January 1962.
Tropical cyclones are rare in the city. The worst cyclone to strike the city occurred on 23 November 1948, with gusts reaching 151 km/h (94 mph) in Juhu, resulting in 38 deaths and 47 people missing. The storm reportedly affected Mumbai for 20 hours and left the city devastated.
Mumbai is prone to monsoon floods, exacerbated by climate change, which affects heavy rains and high tides from the sea. According to the World Bank, unplanned drainage systems and informal settlements are key drivers of Mumbai's frequent floods. Among other causes of flooding in Mumbai are its geographic features: Mumbai's urban area is peninsular—comprising land-filled regions connecting seven islands—and is lower in elevation compared to its surrounding suburbs, which sit on higher ground. Over the past few decades, new informal settlements have emerged in the suburbs, leading to a rapid population increase, inadequate waste management, and drainage congestion. Rainwater from these areas flows heavily toward the low-lying urban zones, which include some slums and high-rise buildings. As a result, slums are either flooded, washed away, or collapse, causing heavy casualties. Floodwaters often linger for extended periods, causing blockages of railway lines—the most commonly used public transport in Mumbai—along with traffic jams, flooded roads, and submerged lanes. Flooding in Mumbai occurs frequently, with the 2005 Mumbai floods causing 500-1000 deaths, widespread household displacements, damage to infrastructure—including heritage sites—and resulting in significant financial losses of US$ 1.2 billion. To reduce flooding in Mumbai, the Maharashtra government adopted a flood mitigation plan that included restructuring the drainage system, restoring the Mithi River, and re-establishing informal settlements. Local civic authorities were tasked with forecasting and issuing eviction notices, while Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC), along with NGOs, would prepare to evacuate residents from vulnerable areas to temporary safe camps.
Air pollution
Air pollution is a major issue in Mumbai. According to the 2016 World Health Organization Global Urban Ambient Air Pollution Database, the annual average PM2.5 concentration in 2013 was 63 μg/m3, which was 6.3 times higher than that recommended by the WHO Air Quality Guideline for annual mean PM2.5. The Central Pollution Control Board for the Government of India and the Consulate General of the United States, Mumbai monitor and publicly share real-time air quality data. In December 2019, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, in partnership with the McKelvey School of Engineering at Washington University in St. Louis, launched the Aerosol and Air Quality Research Facility to study air pollution in Mumbai, among other Indian cities.
Mumbai has been ranked 24th-best "National Clean Air City" (under Category 1 >10L Population cities) in India according to "Swachh Vayu Survekshan 2024 Results".