Kerala-no-dhoro
Kerala-no-dhoro (Gujarati: કેરળ-નો-ઢોરો), also known as Padri, is an archaeological site in Gujarat, India. Belonging to the Indus Valley civilisation, it is located on the southern coast of Kathiawar region. Dating from 3699-3792 B.C. known as Padri Culture or Early Harappan period a part of Sorath Harappan, Indus Valley culture.
Kerala-no-dhoro (Gujarati: કેરળ-નો-ઢોરો), also known as Padri, is an archaeological site in Gujarat, India. Belonging to the Indus Valley civilisation, it is located on the southern coast of Kathiawar region. Dating from 3699-3792 B.C. known as Padri Culture or Early Harappan period a part of Sorath Harappan, Indus Valley culture.
Period
Structures belonging to Early Harappan and Mature Harappan periods were found at this site. A different type of pottery found in this place as well as at Somnath (Prabhas Patan), Lotershwar indicate an indigenous tradition distinct from that of Amri-Nal, known from earlier occupations at Padri and Loteshwar (McIntosh, Jane).
Findings
Copper fish hooks, of exceptionally big size are found here, indicating large fish were caught. Well made, sturdy storage jars were also found at this site, which were used for transporting salt. A jar found at this place is decorated with buffalo horn motif and with a large figure in a ragged skirt and wearing a pair of buffalo horns. In early Harappan levels of this site, symbols similar to Harappan writing were found and such writings were also found at Kalibangan and Dholavira.
Structures
Rectangular houses, houses with rooms and workshops were constructed in Early Harappan Period. Houses constructed during Mature Harappan period were made of mud bricks with floors plastered with lime and dung; and these houses had storage spaces and hearths for cooking.
Salt production
This unwalled village is thought have involved with production of salt, by evaporating sea water.
See also
List of Indus Valley Civilization sites
Gola Dhoro
Bhagatrav
References
Bibliography
McIntosh, Jane R. (2008). The Ancient Indus Valley : New Perspectives. Santa Barbara, California: ABC-CLIO. ISBN 9781576079072.