Transport
Air
There are four international airports (Ahmedabad, Surat, Rajkot Int'l, Vadodara), eight domestic airports (Bhavnagar, Bhuj, Jamnagar, Kandla, Porbandar, Rajkot, Amreli, Keshod), two private airports (Mundra, Mithapur) and three military bases (Bhuj, Jamnagar, Naliya) in Gujarat. Three more airports (Dholera, Ankleshwar, Deesa) are under construction.
Air
There are four international airports (Ahmedabad, Surat, Rajkot Int'l, Vadodara), eight domestic airports (Bhavnagar, Bhuj, Jamnagar, Kandla, Porbandar, Rajkot, Amreli, Keshod), two private airports (Mundra, Mithapur) and three military bases (Bhuj, Jamnagar, Naliya) in Gujarat. Three more airports (Dholera, Ankleshwar, Deesa) are under construction. There are two infrequently used airports situated at Mandvi and Mehsana; the latter serving as a flying school. Gujarat State Aviation Infrastructure Company Limited (GUJSAIL) has been established by the Government of Gujarat to foster development of aviation infrastructure in the state.
These airports are operated and owned by either the Airports Authority of India, Indian Air Force, Government of Gujarat or private companies.
Rail
Gujarat comes under the Western Railway Zone of the Indian Railways. Ahmedabad Junction Railway Station is the most important, centrally located and biggest railway station in Gujarat which connects to all important cities of Gujarat and India. Vadodara Junction Railway Station is the busiest railway station junction in Gujarat and the fifth busiest railway station in India. Surat Railway Station, Rajkot Junction Railway Station, and Sabarmati Junction Railway Station are the other busy and well connected railway stations in the state. Other important railway stations are Mahesana Junction, Palanpur Junction, Bhavnagar Terminus, Nadiad Junction, Valsad Railway Station, Bharuch Junction, Gandhidham Junction, Anand Junction, Godhra Junction Railway Station, etc.
Indian Railways is planning a dedicated rail freight route Delhi–Mumbai passing through the state of Gujarat.
India's first high speed rail line is set to run from Ahmedabad, the largest city in Gujarat to Mumbai, the financial hub of India, with a top speed of 320 km/h (200 mph).
60.06 km (37.32 mi) long tracks of Ahmedabad Metro, a metro rail system for Ahmedabad and Gandhinagar is currently operational. The construction started on 14 March 2015.
Sea
Gujarat State has the longest sea coastline of 1214 km in India.
Mundra Port is the largest port as well as the highest capacity port in India, and it is also the largest container port by volume in the country. It is India's first private port owned and operated by Adani Ports & SEZ. Kandla Port, owned by the central government and operated by Deendayal Port Authority, is one of the largest and busiest ports serving Western India. It has the third-highest cargo capacity in India. Other important ports in Gujarat are the Port of Navlakhi, Port of Magdalla, Port Pipavav, Bedi Port, Port of Porbandar, Port of Veraval and the privately. The state also has Dahej–Ghogha Sea Connect, a Ro-Ro ferry service.
Road
Gujarat State Road Transport Corporation (GSRTC) is the primary body responsible for providing the bus services within the state of Gujarat and also with the neighbouring states. It is a public transport corporation providing bus services and public transit within Gujarat and to the other states in India. Apart from this, there are a number of services provided by GSRTC.
Mofussil Services – connects major cities, smaller towns and villages within Gujarat.
Intercity Bus Services – connects major cities – Ahmedabad,Mehsana, Surat, Veraval, Vapi, Vadodara, Rajkot, Bharuch etc.
Interstate Bus Services – connects various cities of Gujarat with the neighbouring states of Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra and Rajasthan.
City Services – GSRTC provides city bus services at Surat, Vadodara, Vapi, Gandhinagar and Ahmedabad, within the state of Gujarat.
Parcel Services – service used for transporting goods.
Apart from this, the GSRTC provides special bus services for festivals, industrial zones, schools, colleges and pilgrim places also buses are given on contract basis to the public for certain special occasions.
There are also city buses in cities like Ahmedabad (AMTS and Ahmedabad BRTS), Surat (Surat BRTS), Bhavnagar (BMC CITY BUS), Vadodara (Vinayak Logistics), Gandhinagar (VTCOS), Mehsana (Mehsana Muncipal Bus Service), Rajkot (RMTS and Rajkot BRTS), Anand (VTCOS), Bharuch (Gurukrupa) etc.
Auto rickshaws are common mode of transport in Gujarat. The Government of Gujarat is promoting bicycles to reduce pollution by the way of initiative taken by free cycle rides for commuters.