Etymology
The word Hindū is an exonym, derived from Sanskrit word Sindhu, the name of the Indus River as well as the country of the lower Indus basin (Sindh). The Proto-Iranian sound change *s > h occurred between 850 and 600 BCE.
The word Hindū is an exonym, derived from Sanskrit word Sindhu, the name of the Indus River as well as the country of the lower Indus basin (Sindh).
The Proto-Iranian sound change *s > h occurred between 850 and 600 BCE.
"Hindu" occurs in Avesta as heptahindu, equivalent to Rigvedic sapta sindhu.
The 6th-century BCE inscription of Darius I mentions Hindush (referring to Sindh) among his provinces.
Hindustan (spelt "hndstn") is found in a Sasanian inscription from the 3rd century CE.
The term Hindu in these ancient records is a geographical term and did not refer to a religion. In Arabic texts, "Hind", a derivative of Persian "Hindu", was used to refer to the land beyond the Indus and therefore, all the people in that land were "Hindus", according to historian Romila Thapar.
By the 13th century, Hindustan emerged as a popular alternative name of India.
Among the earliest known records of 'Hindu' with connotations of religion may be in the 7th-century CE Chinese text Record of the Western Regions by Xuanzang. In the 14th century, 'Hindu' appeared in several texts in Persian, Sanskrit and Prakrit within India, and subsequently in vernacular languages, often in comparative contexts to contrast them with Muslims or "Turks". Examples include the 14th-century Persian text Futuhu's-salatin by 'Abd al-Malik Isami,
Jain texts such as Vividha Tirtha Kalpa and Vidyatilaka,
circa 1400 Apabhramsa text Kīrttilatā by Vidyapati, 16–18th century Bengali Gaudiya Vaishnava texts, etc.
These native usages of "Hindu" were borrowed from Persian, and they did not always have a religious connotation, but they often did.
In Indian texts, Hindu Dharma ("Hindu religion") was often used to refer to Hinduism.
Starting in the 17th century, European merchants and colonists adopted "Hindu" (often with the English spelling "Hindoo") to refer to residents of India as a religious community.
The term got increasingly associated with the practices of Brahmins, who were also referred to as "Gentiles" and "Gentoos".
Terms such as "Hindoo faith" and "Hindoo religion" were often used, eventually leading to the appearance of "Hindooism" in a letter of Charles Grant in 1787, who used it along with "Hindu religion".
The first Indian to use "Hinduism" may have been Raja Ram Mohan Roy in 1816–17. By the 1840s, the term "Hinduism" was used by those Indians who opposed British colonialism, and who wanted to distinguish themselves from Muslims and Christians.
Before the British began to categorise communities strictly by religion, Indians generally did not define themselves exclusively through their religious beliefs; instead identities were largely segmented on the basis of locality, language, varna, jāti, occupation, and sect.