Places of interest
Garo Hills, known for its abundance of wildlife, attracts naturalists and photographers to capture the multifaceted sights of a unique range of flora and fauna. Two mountain ranges - the Arabella range and the Tura range, pass through the Garo Hills, forming the great Balpakram valley in between.
Garo Hills, known for its abundance of wildlife, attracts naturalists and photographers to capture the multifaceted sights of a unique range of flora and fauna. Two mountain ranges - the Arabella range and the Tura range, pass through the Garo Hills, forming the great Balpakram valley in between. The headquarters town of Tura, at an altitude of 657 m, is 305 km (190 mi) from the state capital Shillong. The highest point in the Garo Hills is Nokrek Peak with elevation of 1,412 m (4,633 ft).
Tura has a picturesque landscape of hills against a backdrop of low-lying plains. A sunset view can be best seen from Tura Peak at 1,400 m (4,600 ft) and its summit can be reached by a 5 km (3.1 mi) trek, partly by hiking and also by rock-climbing.
These are the locations in and around Garo Hills which are tourist spots. These include:
Nokrek Peak: The highest point of the Garo Hills region of the State, Nokrek Peak stands 1,412 m (4,633 ft) above sea level. The mother germoplasm of Citrus-India has been discovered by scientific researchers within Nokrek Range. This discovery led to the establishment of the National CitrusGene Sanctuary-cum-Biosphere Reserve at Nokrek covering an area of 47 km2 (18 sq mi).
Tura Peak: A hill stands on the eastern flank of Tura, the largest town in the Garo Hills region of the state. It peaks 872 m (0.542 mi). above sea level.
Imilchang Dare: This waterfall is located close to Asakgre village in the South Garo Hills district. The deep, wide pool at the bottom of the fall with its wide and expansive surroundings makes it an exciting swimming pool, full of fish of varied sizes and colours.
Balpakram: A National Wildlife Park, located in South Garo Hills and 167 km from Tura. It is home to the rare Lesser Panda, the Indian bison and the stag-like Serow. A variety of medicinal herbs locally called "dikges" grow abundantly in Balpakram.
Napak Lake: Located at a distance of 112 km (70 mi). from Tura, ideal for fishing and bird watching with the river Simsang flowing nearby.
Siju Cave: The famous limestone caves of Siju are located near Simsang River in Siju village.
Wari Chora: Located in South Garo Hills about 35 km (22 mi) from Baghmara Town. This place is known for lofty canyons which mesmerizes any visitor with the charm of the river flowing underneath it and waterfalls dripping continuously. It is a coveted place and it's not on Google map. It takes hours of trekking from Dabalgre village to reach there.