Sports
Kabaddi is a contact sport which is the state game of Tamil Nadu. Pro Kabaddi League is the most popular region based franchise tournament with Tamil Thalaivas representing the state.
Kabaddi is a contact sport which is the state game of Tamil Nadu. Pro Kabaddi League is the most popular region based franchise tournament with Tamil Thalaivas representing the state. Chess is a popular board game which originated as Sathurangam in the 7th century CE. Chennai is often dubbed "India's chess capital" as the city is home to multiple chess grandmasters, including former world champion Viswanathan Anand. The state played host to the World Chess Championship 2013 and 44th Chess Olympiad in 2022. Traditional games like Pallanguzhi, Uriyadi, Gillidanda, Dhaayam are played across the region. Jallikattu and Rekla are traditional sporting events involving bulls. Traditional martial arts include Silambattam, Gatta gusthi, and Adimurai.
Cricket is the most popular sport in the state. The M.A. Chidambaram Stadium established in 1916 is among the oldest cricket stadiums in India and has hosted matches during multiple ICC Cricket World Cups. Established in 1987, MRF Pace Foundation is a bowling academy based in Chennai. Chennai is home to the most successful Indian Premier League (IPL) cricket team, Chennai Super Kings, and hosted the finals during the 2011, 2012, and 2024 seasons. Football is also popular with the Indian Super League being the major club competition and Chennaiyin FC representing the state.
There are multi-purpose venues in major cities including Chennai and Coimbatore, which host football and athletics. Chennai also houses a multi–purpose indoor complex for volleyball, basketball, kabaddi and table tennis. Chennai hosted the 1995 South Asian Games. Tamil Nadu Hockey Association is the governing body of hockey in the state and Mayor Radhakrishnan Stadium in Chennai was the venue for the international hockey tournaments, the 2005 Men's Champions Trophy and the 2007 Men's Asia Cup. Madras Boat Club (founded in 1846) and Royal Madras Yacht Club (founded in 1911) promote sailing, rowing and canoeing sports in Chennai. Inaugurated in 1990, Madras Motor Race Track was the first permanent racing circuit in India and hosts formula racing events. Coimbatore is often referred to as "India's Motorsports Hub" and the "Backyard of Indian Motorsports" and hosts the Kari Motor Speedway, a Formula 3 Category circuit. Horse racing is held at the Guindy Race Course and the state has three 18-hole golf courses, the Cosmopolitan Club, the Gymkhana Club and the Coimbatore Golf Club.