Purpose and activities
A Baháʼí House of Worship is a place of worship of the Baháʼí Faith, where both Baháʼís and non-Baháʼís can express devotion to God. Baháʼí Houses of Worship are open to all regardless of religion, gender, or any other distinction.
A Baháʼí House of Worship is a place of worship of the Baháʼí Faith, where both Baháʼís and non-Baháʼís can express devotion to God. Baháʼí Houses of Worship are open to all regardless of religion, gender, or any other distinction. The only requirements for entry are modest dress and quiet behavior. The Baháʼí laws state that a House of Worship should be built in each city and town. Shoghi Effendi said that a Baháʼí temple is a "silent teacher" of the Baháʼí Faith.
The Baháʼí laws require that only scriptural texts—of the Baháʼí Faith or other religions—may be read or chanted inside, though in any language. Since there are no pulpits, readers may use a simple portable lectern. While readings and prayers that have been set to music may be sung by choirs, no musical instruments may be played inside. Several Baháʼí Houses of Worship have established choirs that sing music based on the Baháʼí writings (scriptures). Baháʼí scripture also states that no pictures, statues, or images may be displayed within Houses of Worship. No sermons may be delivered, and no ritualistic ceremonies may be practiced. Memorial services are sometimes held in Bahá'í Houses of Worship, and while wedding ceremonies are not permitted inside, they are often held in the gardens of the temples. In mainly Christian countries, Baháʼí Houses of Worship offer weekly devotional services on Sundays, with the Baháʼí calendar not yet implemented for temple worship.
Shoghi Effendi taught that Houses of Worship should each be surrounded by a complex of humanitarian, educational, and charitable institutions—such as schools, hospitals, homes for the elderly, universities, and hostels—to serve the areas in which they are situated. He said the future interaction between the House of Worship and its dependencies could provide "the essentials of Baháʼí worship and service, both so vital to the regeneration of the world". To date, only a few such dependencies have been built and no Baháʼí House of Worship has had the full range of dependencies that are envisioned. Shoghi Effendi also viewed the functions of the House of Worship as complementary to those of the Haziratu'l-Quds (commonly known as a Baháʼí centre), and said that it would be desirable if both these buildings were on the same site. At present, Baháʼí devotional meetings in most communities take place in homes or Baháʼí centres, but Elham Afnan notes that such activities "evoke the spirit" of a House of Worship with the goal that it can eventually be constructed.