Continental Houses of Worship
Wilmette, U.S.
The oldest extant Baháʼí House of Worship stands in Wilmette, on the shore of Lake Michigan near Chicago.
Wilmette, U.S.
The oldest extant Baháʼí House of Worship stands in Wilmette, on the shore of Lake Michigan near Chicago. It has received architectural awards. In 1978, it was added to the United States National Register of Historic Places. In 2007, the Baháʼí House of Worship was named one of the Seven Wonders of Illinois by the Illinois Bureau of Tourism. The temple is visited by about 250,000 people every year.
During his journeys to the West, ʻAbdu'l-Bahá came to Wilmette for the groundbreaking ceremony of the temple and laid the foundation stone on 1 May 1912. The principal architect was Louis Bourgeois, though his original design ended up being amended numerous times due to impractical elements. Construction began in 1921 and was completed in 1951, and the temple was dedicated in 1953. The total cost of the construction was above $2.6 million. From 1958–2001, the Wilmette House of Worship was associated with a "home for the aged", operated by the U.S. Baháʼí community.
The cladding of the building is composed of a concrete mixture of Portland cement, quartz, and sand, developed for the temple by John Joseph Earley. From ground level, the building stands approximately 58.2 metres tall and the diameter of the dome is 27.4 metres. The auditorium seats 1,191 visitors. The exterior is adorned with symbols from various religions, including the Latin Cross, the Greek Cross, the star and crescent, the Star of David, the swastika (which is an ancient symbol used in Hinduism, Buddhism, and Jainism), and the five-pointed star. The grounds of the temple feature nine fountains, rows of Chinese junipers, and a wide range of flowers including thousands of tulips planted each fall.
Kampala, Uganda
There is a Baháʼí House of Worship situated on the northern outskirts of Kampala, Uganda's capital and largest city, on Kikaaya Hill. Shoghi Effendi announced that the Kampala temple would be built in 1955 after persecution of Baháʼís in Iran made it impossible for them to build one. It was designed by architect Charles Mason Remey. The foundation stone was laid on 26 January 1957 by Rúhíyyih Khánum, representing Shoghi Effendi. Musa Banani, the first Hand of the Cause in Africa, was also present for the groundbreaking and placed a gift of soil from the Shrine of Baháʼu'lláh, sent by Shoghi Effendi, in the foundation. The dedication ceremony was held in January 1961 and was also attended by Rúhíyyih Khánum.
The building is more than 39 metres high, and over 100 metres in diameter at the base. The dome is over 37 metres high and 13 metres in diameter. As a protection against earthquakes that can occur in the region, the temple has a foundation that goes 3 metres beneath the ground. The temple has seating for 800 people. At the time it was built, the Kampala Baháʼí temple was the tallest building in East Africa.
The temple's dome is built out of fixed mosaic tiles from Italy, whereas the tiles of the lower roof are from Belgium. The wall panels contain windows of green, pale blue, and amber colored glass of German origin. Both the timber used for making the doors and benches and the stone used for the walls of the temple are from within Uganda itself. The property includes the House of Worship, extensive gardens, a guest house, and an administrative centre.
Sydney, Australia
The fourth Baháʼí temple to be completed (and third still standing) is in Ingleside in the northern suburbs of Sydney, Australia. This temple serves as the "Mother Temple of the Antipodes". According to Jennifer Taylor, a historian at Sydney University, it is among Sydney's four most significant religious buildings constructed in the twentieth century. The initial design by Charles Mason Remey was given to Sydney architect John Brogan to develop and complete. It was dedicated in September 1961 and opened to the public after four years of construction.
Construction materials include crushed quartz concrete, local hardwoods in the interior, and concrete and marble in the dome. There is seating for 600 people. The building stands 38 metres in height, has a diameter at its widest point of 20 metres, and is a highly visible landmark from Sydney's northern beaches. The property is set high in a natural bushland setting overlooking the Pacific Ocean. The surrounding gardens contain a variety of native Australian flora including waratahs, three species of eucalypts, caleyi and other grevillea, acacia, and woody pear.
Langenhain, Germany
There is a Baháʼí House of Worship at the foot of the Taunus Mountains of Germany, in the village of Langenhain near Frankfurt. It was designed by German architect Teuto Rocholl. The foundation stone for the temple was laid on 20 November 1960 by Amelia Collins and the temple was dedicated on 4 July 1964. Its construction was opposed by a number of Catholic and Protestant churches in Germany at the time. The temple's superstructure was prefabricated in the Netherlands out of steel and concrete. The center of the interior of the temple is illuminated by light shining through over 500 glass panels above. At its base, the interior is 48 metres in diameter. The height from ground level is 28.3 metres and the temple can seat up to 600 people. Seena Fazel describes the House of Worship as having a "distinctive concrete and glass modernist design".
Panama City, Panama
There is a Baháʼí temple in Panama City, Panama, which was designed by English architect Peter Tillotson. Rúhíyyih Khánum laid the foundation stone on 8 October 1967 and temple was dedicated on 29 April 1972. It is perched on a mountain named Cerro Sonsonate, 10 km northeast of Panama City such that it can be seen from many parts of the city. The temple is built from local stone, which is laid in designs evoking Native American fabric designs and temples of the ancient Americas. The dome is covered with thousands of small oval tiles and rises to a height of 28 metres. The temple has seats made from mahogany for up to 550 people and a floor made from terrazzo.
Tiapapata, Samoa
There is a Baháʼí House of Worship set in Tiapapata, in the hills behind Apia, Samoa. It was designed by Hossein Amanat. Both Malietoa Tanumafili II of Samoa, the world's first Baháʼí head of state, and Rúhíyyih Khánum helped lay the foundation stone on 27 January 1979 and attended the dedication on 1 September 1984. The temple was completed at a total cost of $6.5 million. It has a 30-metre-tall domed structure and seats up to 500 people in the main hall plus 200 on the mezzanine level. The structure is open to the island breezes; Graham Hassall writes that this fosters a suitable environment for meditation and prayer.
New Delhi, India
In Bahapur, New Delhi, India, there is a Baháʼí House of Worship that is commonly known as the Lotus Temple, which was designed by Iranian-American architect Fariborz Sahba. Rúhíyyih Khánum laid the foundation stone on 17 October 1977 and dedicated the temple on 24 December 1986. The total cost was $10 million. The temple has won numerous architectural awards, including from the Institution of Structural Engineers, the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America, and the Architectural Society of China. It has also become a major attraction for people of various religions, with up to 100,000 visitors on some Hindu holy days; estimates for the number of visitors per year range from 2.5 million to 5 million. The temple is often listed as one of Delhi's main tourist attractions, and even as one of the most visited buildings in the world.
Inspired by the sacred lotus flower, the temple's design is composed of 27 free-standing, marble-clad "petals" grouped into clusters of three and thus forming nine entryways. The temple's shape has symbolic and inter-religious significance because the lotus is often associated with the Hindu goddess Lakshmi. Nine doors open onto a central hall with permanent seating for 1,200 people, which can be expanded for a total seating capacity of 2,500 people. The temple rises to a height of 40.8 metres and is situated on a property that covers 105,000 square metres and features nine surrounding ponds. An educational centre beside the temple was established in 2017. The temple uses solar panels to produce 120 kW of the 500 kW of electricity it requires in total.
Santiago, Chile
The continental Baháʼí House of Worship for South America (or "Mother Temple for South America") is located in Santiago, Chile. Shoghi Effendi announced Chile as the site for the continental temple of South America in 1953, and in 2001 the process to build the temple was launched. The chosen design was by Siamak Hariri of Hariri Pontarini Architects in Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Excavation was initiated at the site in 2010 and construction began in 2012. The doors opened on 19 October 2016. The Santiago temple cost a total of $30 million to build and has won a range of Canadian and international architectural awards.
The Santiago Baháʼí House of Worship is ringed by nine entrances, nine pathways, and nine fountains, and the structure is composed of nine arching "sails". These have also been described as nine "petals" and the temple's shape as "floral"; the "petals" are separated by glass which allows light to illuminate the temple's interior. The exterior of the "petals" is made from cast glass while the interior is made from translucent Portuguese marble. The sides of the temple are held up on the inside by a steel and aluminum superstructure. The temple can seat 600 people and it is 30 metres high and 30 metres in diameter.