Lists of World Heritage Sites
The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) World Heritage Sites are places of importance to cultural or natural heritage as described in the UNESCO World Heritage Convention, established in 1972. Cultural heritage consists of monuments (such as architectural works, monumental sculptures, or inscriptions), groups of buildings, and sites (including archaeological sites). Natural heritage consists of natural features (physical and biological formations), geological and physiographical formations (including habitats of threatened species of animals and plants), and natural sites which are important from the point of view of science, conservation, or natural beauty. UNESCO lists sites under ten criteria; each entry must meet at least one of the criteria. Criteria i through vi are cultural, and vii through x are natural. In addition to sites inscribed on the World Heritage List, member states can maintain a list of tentative sites that they may consider for nomination. Nominations for the World Heritage List are only accepted if the site was previously listed on the tentative list.
The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) World Heritage Sites are places of importance to cultural or natural heritage as described in the UNESCO World Heritage Convention, established in 1972. Cultural heritage consists of monuments (such as architectural works, monumental sculptures, or inscriptions), groups of buildings, and sites (including archaeological sites). Natural heritage consists of natural features (physical and biological formations), geological and physiographical formations (including habitats of threatened species of animals and plants), and natural sites which are important from the point of view of science, conservation, or natural beauty. UNESCO lists sites under ten criteria; each entry must meet at least one of the criteria. Criteria i through vi are cultural, and vii through x are natural. In addition to sites inscribed on the World Heritage List, member states can maintain a list of tentative sites that they may consider for nomination. Nominations for the World Heritage List are only accepted if the site was previously listed on the tentative list.
General lists
Lists by United Nations geoscheme
Africa
Americas
Asia
Europe
Oceania
List of World Heritage Sites in Australia and New Zealand
List of World Heritage Sites in Australia
List of World Heritage Sites in New Zealand
List of World Heritage Sites in Melanesia
List of World Heritage Sites in Fiji
List of World Heritage Sites in Papua New Guinea
List of World Heritage Sites in Solomon Islands
List of World Heritage Sites in Vanuatu
List of World Heritage Sites in Micronesia
List of World Heritage Sites in Kiribati
List of World Heritage Sites in the Marshall Islands
List of World Heritage Sites in the Federated States of Micronesia
List of World Heritage Sites in Nauru
List of World Heritage Sites in Palau
List of World Heritage Sites in Polynesia
List of World Heritage Sites in Samoa
List of World Heritage Sites in Tonga
List of World Heritage Sites in Tuvalu
List of World Heritage Sites in Niue
See also
UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage Lists
References