List of World Heritage Sites in China
The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) World Heritage Sites are places of importance to cultural or natural heritage as described in the UNESCO World Heritage Convention, established in 1972. Cultural heritage consists of monuments (such as architectural works, monumental sculptures, or inscriptions), groups of buildings, and sites (including archaeological sites). Natural features (consisting of physical and biological formations), geological and physiographical formations (including habitats of threatened species of animals and plants), and natural sites which are important from the point of view of science, conservation or natural beauty, are defined as natural heritage. China accepted the convention on 12 December 1985, making its sites eligible for inclusion on the list.
China has 60 World Heritage Sites on the list, ranking second in the world, just below Italy with 61 sites. Of these 60 sites, 41 are listed for their cultural, 15 for their natural, and 4 sites for both cultural and natural significance. In addition, China also has 60 sites on its tentative list.
The first sites in China were added to the list in 1987 when six sites were inscribed. The most recent additions took place in 2025 when the Xixia Imperial Tombs were listed. One site is transnational, as the Silk Roads: the Routes Network of Chang'an-Tianshan Corridor is shared with Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan.
The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) World Heritage Sites are places of importance to cultural or natural heritage as described in the UNESCO World Heritage Convention, established in 1972. Cultural heritage consists of monuments (such as architectural works, monumental sculptures, or inscriptions), groups of buildings, and sites (including archaeological sites). Natural features (consisting of physical and biological formations), geological and physiographical formations (including habitats of threatened species of animals and plants), and natural sites which are important from the point of view of science, conservation or natural beauty, are defined as natural heritage. China accepted the convention on 12 December 1985, making its sites eligible for inclusion on the list.
China has 60 World Heritage Sites on the list, ranking second in the world, just below Italy with 61 sites. Of these 60 sites, 41 are listed for their cultural, 15 for their natural, and 4 sites for both cultural and natural significance. In addition, China also has 60 sites on its tentative list.
The first sites in China were added to the list in 1987 when six sites were inscribed. The most recent additions took place in 2025 when the Xixia Imperial Tombs were listed. One site is transnational, as the Silk Roads: the Routes Network of Chang'an-Tianshan Corridor is shared with Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan.
World Heritage Sites
UNESCO lists sites under ten criteria; each entry must meet at least one of the criteria. Criteria i through vi are cultural, and vii through x are natural.
Tentative list
In addition to sites inscribed on the World Heritage List, member states can maintain a list of tentative sites that they may consider for nomination. Nominations for the World Heritage List are only accepted if the site was previously listed on the tentative list. China has 60 sites on its tentative list.
See also
National priority protected site
Principles for the Conservation of Heritage Sites in China
References