List of World Heritage Sites in Japan
The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) World Heritage Sites are places of importance to cultural or natural heritage as described in the UNESCO World Heritage Convention, established in 1972. Cultural heritage consists of monuments (such as architectural works, monumental sculptures, or inscriptions), groups of buildings, and sites (including archaeological sites). Natural heritage consists of natural features (physical and biological formations), geological and physiographical formations (including habitats of threatened species of animals and plants), and natural sites which are important from the point of view of science, conservation, or natural beauty. Japan accepted the UNESCO World Heritage Convention on 30 June 1992.
There are 26 sites listed in Japan, with a further four sites on the tentative list. Japan's first entries to the list took place in 1993, when four sites were inscribed. The most recent site, the Sado mine, was listed in 2024. Among the sites, 21 are listed for their cultural and five for their natural significance. One site is transnational: The Architectural Work of Le Corbusier is shared with six other countries. Japan has served on the World Heritage Committee four times.
The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) World Heritage Sites are places of importance to cultural or natural heritage as described in the UNESCO World Heritage Convention, established in 1972. Cultural heritage consists of monuments (such as architectural works, monumental sculptures, or inscriptions), groups of buildings, and sites (including archaeological sites). Natural heritage consists of natural features (physical and biological formations), geological and physiographical formations (including habitats of threatened species of animals and plants), and natural sites which are important from the point of view of science, conservation, or natural beauty. Japan accepted the UNESCO World Heritage Convention on 30 June 1992.
There are 26 sites listed in Japan, with a further four sites on the tentative list. Japan's first entries to the list took place in 1993, when four sites were inscribed. The most recent site, the Sado mine, was listed in 2024. Among the sites, 21 are listed for their cultural and five for their natural significance. One site is transnational: The Architectural Work of Le Corbusier is shared with six other countries. Japan has served on the World Heritage Committee four times.
World Heritage Sites
UNESCO lists sites under ten criteria; each entry must meet at least one of the criteria. Criteria i through vi are cultural, and vii through x are natural.
Tentative list
In addition to sites inscribed on the World Heritage List, member states can maintain a list of tentative sites that they may consider for nomination. Nominations for the World Heritage List are only accepted if the site was previously listed on the tentative list. Japan maintains four properties on its tentative list.
See also
List of Intangible Cultural Heritage elements in Japan
Cultural Properties of Japan
National Treasures of Japan
Cultural Landscapes of Japan
National parks of Japan
References
External links
(in Japanese) World Heritage Sites in Japan
(in Japanese) Database of National Cultural Properties - World Heritage (世界遺産)