Preservation and care
United Kingdom
To protect, preserve and care for ancient monuments, various laws were passed during the late 19th and the 20th centuries. These included the Ancient Monuments Protection Act of 1882 and the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Areas Act 1979.
United Kingdom
To protect, preserve and care for ancient monuments, various laws were passed during the late 19th and the 20th centuries. These included the Ancient Monuments Protection Act of 1882 and the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Areas Act 1979. The 1882 Act was passed after several unsuccessful attempts, which ensured government involvement in England and Ireland to legally preserve and conserve ancient monuments. Following this, in 1913, the Ancient Monuments Consolidation and Amendment Act provided an extension to the existing powers by introducing a concept known as Preservation Orders. This enabled monuments under threat of removal or damage from neglectful treatment to be classified under the protection of the Commissioners of Works. In particular, Section 6.2 qualified the monuments as of national importance and required them to be preserved. Additionally, any ancient monument could be considered for inclusion on that list, not just those in the Guardian of the State, and this meant that for the first time legislative protection could be applied on a large scale. Thus Guardianship Monuments were distinguished to what later became defined as "Scheduled Monuments".
Furthermore, the Ancient Monuments Act 1931 extended its protection policies around previous monuments, including the scheduled monuments on the list, by introducing a notification system. As part of this system, monument owners had to give the Commissioners of Works three months' notice in writing of any works affecting the monument; this remained in force until 1979. During the 1930s and 1940s, there were a number of background strategies by various organisations concerned with ancient monuments. In the immediate aftermath of the Second World War, a committee was established to look into the existing state and future direction of archaeological work in Britain. This resulted in the publication of A Survey and policy of field research in the archaeology of Great Britain; and from this, more information about the past to fill gaps in knowledge.
Historic Building and Ancient Monuments Act 1953
Field Monuments Act 1972
Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Areas Act 1979: This Act consolidated and strengthened previous legislation made in relation to all types of ancient monuments. In addition to this, a Scheduled Monument Consent system was implemented to replace the notification procedure as outlined previously.