Tourism
Heritage tourism
Following the mass decolonisation period after World War II, identity through remains, the past and landscapes became more common; and global tourism rapidly increased. With the rise of globalisation, tourism has grown to become a type of commodity during the 21st century, with new places and elements to discover.
Heritage tourism
Following the mass decolonisation period after World War II, identity through remains, the past and landscapes became more common; and global tourism rapidly increased. With the rise of globalisation, tourism has grown to become a type of commodity during the 21st century, with new places and elements to discover. In addition to this, the exoticism and romanticism around experiencing other "more authentic" cultures have contributed to heritage and cultural tourism. As a result, ancient monuments are linked to heritage tourism because of the cultural and national aspect that the monuments embody. Heritage tours (including tours of ancient monuments) may include religious tourism and patriotic tourism.
Religious tourism
The concept of religious heritage tourism has been around for several centuries. According to Bond, Packer and Ballantyne, people have their own purpose and motives for visiting a religious heritage site or location. These include five key factors: to find spiritual and emotional connection, to discover new things, to engage mentally, to interact or belong as well as searching for peace to relax. Religious site tourism is also linked to pilgrimage as well as paying a visit to sites such as the Western Wall, the Church of the Holy Sepulchre and the Dome of the Rock in the Old City of Jerusalem. All these sites are considered to be ancient monuments as they are of historical and cultural importance.
Patriotic tourism
Tourism that are attached to nationalistic or patriotic sentiments is another type of heritage tourism. In the modern context, post World War I and World War II, certain places and sites and being claimed as nationalistic sites that patriotic tourists visit for the purpose of reclaiming and reaffirming their heritage and national identity. Such sites include the forts and castles of Ghana, the ANZAC Cove and the Great Wall of China. These types of ancient monuments fall under the category of national and historical importance. They are associated with culturally driven tourism linking to the colonial and violent past of nations that have become symbols of cultural reaffirmation and awakening.
Archaeological tourism
Whilst certain types of tourism can negatively impact the sustainability of historical and ancient sites, archaeological tourists have led to the conservation and maintenance of ancient monuments. All archaeological disciplines apply the same types of methods and one includes the study of the physical artefact or site. In the modern world, most archaeologists are involved in excavations to rescue and preserve archaeological traces that can be damaged from activities such as housing, road-building, natural gas pipelines or airports. Cultural heritage plays an important role with globalization and increasing ethnic recognition and thus, this type of management is significant. As such, archaeologists are taking care of several ancient monuments and historical sites, and with the growth of tourism, this has become more vital and is defined as "heritage management".
Archaeologists alongside to architects help preserve what other specialists, including art historians, cultural geographers, or ethnologists, study. These may include medieval churches, monolithic monuments or ancient relics, stupas or paintings. For example, the study of the concept of "dying culture" refers to a part or portion of a living, an existing culture that has older origins, however, is still in use. In this case, preservation of traditional objects, artefacts and monuments through archaeological study is both important for ancient monuments and the tourism industry.
Examples of archaeological excavation that are classified as ancient monuments:
Moai Statues Easter Island, Chile
Chichen Itza, Mexico
Tikal, Guatemala
Acropolis of Athens, Greece
Giza Pyramids, Egypt
Ancient Petra, Jordan
Other categories of tourists
Journalists
Students studying certain sites
Volunteers
Community leaders and politicians