Impact
Overview
On 7 October 2023, Hamas attacked Israel, killing more than a thousand people (including more than 800 civilians) and taking some 251 hostages. In response Israel began a counterattack on Gaza; its initial focus was on the northern Gaza Strip, and bombing intensified towards the end of 2023 and expanded to the south with ground invasions to the extent that more half of the buildings in the Strip had been damaged or destroyed by January 2024.
Overview
On 7 October 2023, Hamas attacked Israel, killing more than a thousand people (including more than 800 civilians) and taking some 251 hostages. In response Israel began a counterattack on Gaza; its initial focus was on the northern Gaza Strip, and bombing intensified towards the end of 2023 and expanded to the south with ground invasions to the extent that more half of the buildings in the Strip had been damaged or destroyed by January 2024. More than 46,600 Palestinians had been killed by the time of a ceasefire in January 2025, with the majority consisting of women and children, and there was extensive damage to civilian infrastructure. Israel's bombing campaign is one of the most destructive in recent history, and nearly 80% of the buildings in the Gaza Strip were damaged or destroyed during the conflict by July 2025. The destruction has left residential areas devastated, and 1.9 million people have been displaced.
The Palestinian Ministry of Culture published several interim reports on the impact of the war on Gaza's cultural heritage. In February 2024, they reported that 44 people involved with arts and culture were killed and around 200 historic buildings were damaged or destroyed, along with 12 museums and numerous cultural centres. Intangible cultural heritage has also been affected through the loss of centres that provided community activities and supported Gazan culture. In January 2025, shortly after the ceasefire, the Ministry of Culture began a process of evaluating the impact on the ground. UNESCO has an ongoing damage assessment. Due to an inability to access Gaza it has been able to verify the impact on a smaller number of sites: 110 as of 18 August 2025. On the ground in Gaza, Palestinian archaeologist Fadel al-Utol has been coordinating a group documenting the destruction of cultural heritage sites. The World Bank estimated that over US$300 million damage had been caused to Gaza's cultural heritage by the end of January 2024, part of US$18 billion damage to Gaza's built infrastructure. Restoring all the damaged sites would take nearly a decade.
Museums, archives, and libraries
A Ministry of Culture noted that 12 museums had been damaged. The Al Qarara Cultural Museum was destroyed by an Israeli airstrike early on in the conflict. On 25 November 2023, the Rashad Shawa Cultural Center was destroyed by Israeli shelling. It had been used as a shelter for hundreds of civilians and contained a theatre and library with tens of thousands of books. Other libraries, including Gaza Municipal Library, Enaim Library, Al-Nahda Library, Al-Shorouq Al-Daem Library, the Kana'an Educational Development Institute, were reported as damaged or destroyed in November and December 2023.
In December 2023, bombardment by Israel destroyed the Central Archives of Gaza City which contained thousands of historically important documents. The Great Omari Mosque housed one of the most important libraries in Palestine; the rare books in its collection, which had survived the crusades and the First World War, were destroyed in the airstrike. The medieval Qasr al-Basha, also known as Pasha's Palace, was left in ruins after Israeli bombardment. The palace functioned as an archaeology museum. Other museums damaged or looted during the conflict included the Akkad Museum in Khan Yunis and the Rafah Museum.
Religious sites
In February 2025, Gaza's Ministry of Endowments reported that 79% of the mosques in the Gaza Strip had been destroyed. On 19 October an Israeli airstrike hit the Church of Saint Porphyrius campus, the oldest church in Gaza. Hundreds of civilians were sheltering there at the time of the attack, and 18 people including several children were killed. The Sayed al-Hashim Mosque was also amongst the sites damaged during the first months of the conflict. The Omari Mosque – the oldest mosque in Gaza – was hit by an Israeli airstrike in December, leaving only the minaret intact.
In July 2024, the 15th-century Ibn Uthman Mosque in Gaza's Shuja'iyya neighbourhood was destroyed by an airstrike during an Israeli attack on the area. Further destruction was reported by Al-Jazeera in August, with the Great Mosque of Khan Yunis destroyed with explosives and IDF soldiers burning a Quran in the Bani Saleh Mosque in northern Gaza. In the assessment of Mariam Shah, a peace and conflict researcher, "Israel has targeted ancient mosques and churches, which are symbols of both historical and religious significance. These sites transcend physicality; they are vessels of faith and tradition, preserving local architectural legacies and representing the long history of interfaith coexistence in Gaza."
Cemeteries
An investigation by CNN in early 2024 using satellite imagery identified sixteen cemeteries in Gaza that had been damaged as a result of the conflict. The Israel Defense Forces (IDF) used bulldozers to level cemeteries and dig up bodies, and in some cases established fortified positions on top of burial grounds.
Places of education
On 17 January 2024, the IDF used mines to destroy the main building of Israa University. The destruction of the university included its library and national museum. Israa University stated that occupying forces took over 3,000 artefacts from its museum prior to the university building's destruction. In May, the IDF Military Police opened an investigation into video footage showing IDF soldiers burning books, including a Quran in a mosque in Rafah in the south of the Gaza Strip and books at the Al-Aqsa University library.
Archaeological and cultural sites
Many archaeological sites were damaged during the war, though the full extent is obscured by active conflict. On 8 October 2023, researchers found rocket damage at the Roman cemetery of Ard-al-Moharbeen, an archaeological site discovered in 2022. The ancient port of Anthedon was completely destroyed. Analysis by the Gaza Maritime Archaeology Project of aerial photography established that archaeological sites such as Tell el-Ajjul and Maiuma had sustained damage from airstrikes by November. The same month, ICOMOS Palestine reported that the historic Souq Al-Zawiya (a market) had been destroyed by the Israeli Air Force. Tell es-Sakan, a Bronze Age settlement south of Gaza City, and Tell Ruqiash, an Iron Age fortified site near Deir al-Balah, were damaged by shelling.
The Marmara Memorial dedicated to those killed during the 2010 Gaza flotilla raid was demolished by the IDF in November 2023. The Hamam al-Sammara bath in the Zeitoun Quarter of the Old City was destroyed in December 2023. The Gold Market, also known as the Qissariya Market, was destroyed in December around the same time as the nearby Omari Mosque. In July 2024, the Gold Market was further damaged. The Shababeek for Contemporary Art had a collection of 20,000 artworks and was destroyed in March 2024 during the siege of the nearby Al-Shifa Hospital. On 14 September 2025, the Israeli air force struck a building housing the archives of the École biblique et archéologique française in the Rimal neighborhood of Gaza City. Israeli authorities had warned EBAF a few days earlier of is intention; though important artefacts were removed in an emergency operation and most of the collection remained in the building at the time of the attack.