International response
On 14 December 2023, UNESCO gave "provisional enhanced protection" to Saint Hilarion Monastery, one of the oldest monasteries in the Middle East. In the announcement, UNESCO called for the protection of heritage sites during the war: "While priority is rightly given to the humanitarian situation, the protection of cultural heritage in all its forms must also be taken into account.
On 14 December 2023, UNESCO gave "provisional enhanced protection" to Saint Hilarion Monastery, one of the oldest monasteries in the Middle East. In the announcement, UNESCO called for the protection of heritage sites during the war: "While priority is rightly given to the humanitarian situation, the protection of cultural heritage in all its forms must also be taken into account. .... Cultural property should not be targeted or used for military purposes, as it is considered to be civilian infrastructure." It is conducting research using remote monitoring to assess damage to cultural heritage sites. At its next session in July, UNESCO added 'The Monastery of Saint Hilarion/Tell Umm Amer' to the list of World Heritage Sites; it was also added to the List of World Heritage in Danger at the same due to the war.
In December 2023, South Africa brought a case to the International Court of Justice alleging that Israel was committing genocide against the Palestinian people, noting the destruction of cultural heritage amongst its evidence. The destruction of cultural heritage sites has been characterised by some as cultural genocide, and linked to the urbicide in the Gaza Strip. Israel denied the accusations, saying its campaign is restricted to military targets.
Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Monitor organised a petition calling for a boycott of Israeli academic institutions as part of a response to the destruction of Gaza's educational institutions, cultural heritage, and the killing of students and teachers; it gathered more than 100 signatures from European academics. Separately, 1,600 academics in North America signed an open letter condemning the scholasticide in Gaza and the destruction of cultural heritage. The American Historical Association's members voted to condemn Israel's actions in Gaza, the scholasticide, and the destruction of libraries and archives. Employees of the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York wrote an open letter to the museum's chief executive encouraging him to publicly make a statement on the destruction of Gaza's heritage as it was consistent with the museum's public stance in previous conflicts that threatened culture. A group of 500 publishers, collaborating under the name 'Publishers for Palestine', as the Frankfurt Book Fair (held in October 2024) to condemn the attack on Gaza and to not work with "complicit Israeli book publishers". In mid-2025, five hundred Romanian cultural workers wrote an open letter to the Romanian government asking them to "stand against the genocide, ecocide and cultural genocide".
The Palestine Exploration Fund released a statement condemning the destruction in Gaza along with the attack by Hamas on 7 October; it also stated that it would not fund or publish research engaging with items unlawfully removed from Palestine. The Institute of Conservation (Icon), the Middle East Studies Association, and the Iran Public Libraries Foundation condemned the destruction of Palestine's heritage, while PEN America noted that it was "gravely alarmed by and mourn the loss of these cultural institutions and all that they represent". A group of UN experts commented on the destruction of cultural heritage that "The foundations of Palestinian society are being reduced to rubble, and their history is being erased". In the view of Mahmoud Hawari, former director of The Palestinian Museum, the intentional destruction of Palestinian cultural heritage "demonstrates the Israeli political and military leadership's intent to destroy the Palestinian people and their cultural identity". The Council on American–Islamic Relations characterised the destruction as deliberate and evidence that "the Israeli apartheid government is seeking to eliminate Palestinian existence in Gaza and the West Bank".
The destruction of and threat to physical materials has led to increased efforts to digitise works. Supporting physical preservation and recording, the Aliph Foundation began a $1 million project in collaboration with the Riwaq Centre for Architectural Conservation in the West Bank to assess the impact of the war on Gaza's historic sites and to train people to conduct the work and document heritage at risk. By September 2024, evaluations were underway at the Great Mosque of Gaza, Al-Saqqa House, and a historic courtyard (Dar-Farah).
During the conflict, exhibitions of archaeological finds from Gaza have taken place in Europe. Some of the objects on display were excavated in Gaza in the 1990s and shipped to Paris for display in 2000, but which could not be returned due to the Second Intifada; the artefacts were later transferred to Geneva where they remained until 2024. From October 2024 to February 2025, the Museum of Art and History in Geneva held an exhibition of 44 artefacts from Gaza; titled "Patrimony in Peril", it commemorated the 70th anniversary of the Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict. The Museum of Art and History coordinated with the Institut du Monde Arabe, is displaying 130 items from Gaza from April to November in an exhibition titled "Trésors sauvés de Gaza. 5000 ans d'histoire" ("Saved Treasures of Gaza: 5000 Years of History"). The World Monuments Fund publish a list every two years of historic places under threat to raise awareness of their situation. Gaza's historic urban fabric was amongst the 25 places included in the 2025 list. The founder of human rights non-governmental organisation Al-Haq advocated for the reconstruction of Gaza cultural sites as a way of rejecting Donald Trump's mooted suggestion for the US to takeover the Gaza Strip. In September 2925 the UN's Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the Occupied Palestinian Territory concluded that Israel had committed genocide in the Gaza Strip, taking into account the destruction of cultural sites amongst the evidence.