Background
Cultural heritage in Gaza
Cultural heritage is passed down from generation to generation, comprising material culture such as artworks and buildings and intangible things such as traditions and ways of life. A 2010 survey identified 13 libraries in the Gaza Strip, and in 2017 there were five museums.
Cultural heritage in Gaza
Cultural heritage is passed down from generation to generation, comprising material culture such as artworks and buildings and intangible things such as traditions and ways of life. A 2010 survey identified 13 libraries in the Gaza Strip, and in 2017 there were five museums. In the view of archaeologist Jean-Baptiste Humbert, "Gaza's society is sensitive to its heritage, but the crushing that has been inflicted by the occupying forces over the past fifty years means that vital priorities like feeding, caring for, and educating the population have pushed cultural heritage aside as a luxury for wealthy countries."
The Gaza Strip is densely populated and modern buildings are often built over archaeological sites. In 2023 there were more than 300 architectural heritage sites in Gaza, including a range of different structures such as mosques, palaces, schools, and cemeteries. The most common categories of historic site according to the Ministry of Tourism and Antiquities are houses, followed by tells (settlement mounds) and mosques.
The historic buildings and heritage sites that make up a place embody its collective identity and history; they are important to the community of which they are a part and are an extension of their identity. Memory of significant places and events can be preserved through material culture – from small objects to buildings. For Palestinians forcibly displaced from their homes in 1948 during the Nakba, the Palestinian key has become tangible symbols of the homes they had to leave behind.
Destruction of cultural heritage
Speaking about cultural heritage broadly, the archaeologist Cornelius Holtorf remarked "If heritage is said to contribute to people's identities, the loss of heritage can contribute to people's identities even more." Destruction of places and cultural heritage is often part of war and genocide and is intended to undermine a society. It has been used in this way from prehistory and classical antiquity to the modern day, notably in Nazi persecution of the Jews. The philosopher Jeff Malpas highlights the use of destruction to exert authority and control over other groups as a significant issue in Israel–Palestine relations.
Cultural sites are protected under Article 53 of Protocol I of the Geneva Conventions, and the intentional destruction of historic monument or buildings is considered a war crime. The Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict requires that states "[refrain] from any use of the property and its immediate surroundings or of the appliances in use for its protection for purposes which are likely to expose it to destruction or damage in the event of armed conflict; and by refraining from any act of hostility, directed against such property". Previous conflicts between Gaza and Israel have affected the Gaza Strip's cultural heritage sites; this includes the 2008–09 war which resulted in damage to Gaza's libraries and what was then its only museum, while the 2014 war damaged more than 170 mosques in Gaza.