List of Indus Valley Civilisation sites
The Indus Valley Civilisation (IVC), also known as the Harappan Civilisation, was a major early civilisation, existing from 3300–1300 BCE. It covered much of modern-day Pakistan and northwest India, as well as possessing at least one trading colony in northeast Afghanistan.
Over 1000 Indus Valley Civilisation sites have been discovered. Only 40 sites on the Indus valley were known in the pre-Partition era by archaeologists.
The most widely known Indus Valley sites are Mohenjo-daro and Harappa; Mohenjo-daro is located in modern-day Sindh, while Harappa is in West Punjab. More than 90% of the inscribed objects and seals that were discovered were found at ancient urban centres along the Indus river in Pakistan, mainly in Harappa and Mohenjo-daro. More than 50 IVC burial sites have been found, including at Rakhigarhi (first site with genetic testing), Mohenjo-Daro, Harappa, Farmana, Kalibangan, Lothal, Dholavira, Mehrgarh, Banawali, Alamgirpur and Chanhudaro .
The Indus Valley Civilisation (IVC), also known as the Harappan Civilisation, was a major early civilisation, existing from 3300–1300 BCE. It covered much of modern-day Pakistan and northwest India, as well as possessing at least one trading colony in northeast Afghanistan.
Over 1000 Indus Valley Civilisation sites have been discovered. Only 40 sites on the Indus valley were known in the pre-Partition era by archaeologists.
The most widely known Indus Valley sites are Mohenjo-daro and Harappa; Mohenjo-daro is located in modern-day Sindh, while Harappa is in West Punjab. More than 90% of the inscribed objects and seals that were discovered were found at ancient urban centres along the Indus river in Pakistan, mainly in Harappa and Mohenjo-daro. More than 50 IVC burial sites have been found, including at Rakhigarhi (first site with genetic testing), Mohenjo-Daro, Harappa, Farmana, Kalibangan, Lothal, Dholavira, Mehrgarh, Banawali, Alamgirpur and Chanhudaro .
List of Indus Valley sites
Context of IVC sites and cultures
Wider context of the IVC includes the following:
Meluhha
Indus–Mesopotamia relations
Conflict with the Akkadians and Neo-Sumerians
List of inventions and discoveries of the Indus Valley Civilization
Hydraulic engineering of the Indus Valley Civilization
Sanitation of the Indus Valley Civilisation
Periodisation of the Indus Valley Civilisation
Pottery in the Indian subcontinent
Bara culture, subtype of Late-Harappan Phase
Cemetery H culture (2000-1400 BC), early Indo-Aryan pottery at IVC sites later evolved into Painted Grey Ware culture of Vedic period
Black and red ware, belonging to Neolithic and Early-Harappan phases
Sothi-Siswal culture, subtype of Early-Harappan Phase
See also
Timeline of Pakistani history
Timeline of Indian history
List of archaeological sites by country
World Heritage Sites by country
References
Bibliography
McIntosh, Jane R. (2008). The Ancient Indus Valley: New Perspectives. Santa Barbara, California: ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1-57607-907-2.