List of archaeological sites in Peru
Archaeological sites in Peru are numerous and diverse, representing different aspects including temples and fortresses of the various cultures of ancient Peru, such as the Moche and Nazca. The sites vary in importance from small local sites to UNESCO World Heritage sites of global importance. Their nature and complexity of the sites vary from small single-featured sites such as pyramids to entire cities, such as Chan Chan and Machu Picchu. Preservation and investigation of these sites are controlled mainly by the Culture Ministry (MINCUL) (Spanish: Ministerio de Cultura (Perú)). The lack of funding to protect sites and enforce existing laws, results in large scale looting and illegal trading of artifacts.
In the Archeology Geographic Information System prepared by the Ministry of Culture, you can see the location of all pre-Hispanic monuments of Perú.
Archaeological sites in Peru are numerous and diverse, representing different aspects including temples and fortresses of the various cultures of ancient Peru, such as the Moche and Nazca. The sites vary in importance from small local sites to UNESCO World Heritage sites of global importance. Their nature and complexity of the sites vary from small single-featured sites such as pyramids to entire cities, such as Chan Chan and Machu Picchu. Preservation and investigation of these sites are controlled mainly by the Culture Ministry (MINCUL) (Spanish: Ministerio de Cultura (Perú)). The lack of funding to protect sites and enforce existing laws, results in large scale looting and illegal trading of artifacts.
In the Archeology Geographic Information System prepared by the Ministry of Culture, you can see the location of all pre-Hispanic monuments of Perú.
Sites
The following is an alphabetical list of archaeological sites in Peru, it lists the main archaeological sites of touristic importance as published by the Ministry of Foreign Commerce and Tourism.
See also
Cultural periods of Peru
List of pre-Columbian cultures
References
External links
(in Spanish) National Institute for Culture (INC)
(in Spanish) Archaeological sites in Peru
(in English) From Chavin to the Inca, a timeline of the Central Andes
Timeline of the Andean Cultures of South America