Roman theatre
The theatre was one of the glories of Neapolis according to Augustus, the guardian of Hellenic culture.  History
Claudius had plays performed here in honour of his beloved brother Germanicus.
The theatre was one of the glories of Neapolis according to Augustus, the guardian of Hellenic culture.
History
Claudius had plays performed here in honour of his beloved brother Germanicus.
In 64 AD Nero performed here. Naples prided itself on its Greek origins and Greek culture. Nero took his appearances on stage seriously, practicing, engaging in the strenuous voice-exercises, learning his performance. He had just started to sing when a violent earthquake occurred that he interpreted as the gods' appreciation so continued to sing and forced the audience to stay. The theatre collapsed afterwards.
The theatre was renovated during the late 1st century and in the 2nd century. Statius in the Flavian age exalts in the temples and a large arcaded square (perhaps the Forum) and refers to two large theatres in the city, the open and the covered one, located in the upper part of the Forum, behind the sacred area of the temple of the Dioscuri.
The fall of the Roman Empire also marked the fall of theatrical performances in general and the structure was abandoned, also after a flood between the 5th and 6th centuries.
The mediaeval period saw the oblivion of the structure, used first as a small necropolis (datable to the 7th century) or landfill and finally, between the 15th and 17th centuries it was overwhelmed by the construction of buildings on the cavea.
The interiors were used as stables, cellars, warehouses and shops until recently. First discoveries took place in 1859 for the excavation of a sewer. The first archaeological excavation was at the end of the 19th century in the garden of the building at the centre of the theatre. The first recovery plan dates to 1939 but only from 1997 was the theatre partially unveiled, and from 2003 the cavea was revealed in the internal garden.
Remains
The theatre lies between via Anticaglia to the north, via San Paolo to the west and vico Giganti to the east.
Dating to the 1st century BC, it was built over a previous Greek building of the 4th century BC, also probably intended for theatrical performance. Unlike the Odeon which stood next to it and was intended for particular musical events, the theatre was uncovered.
Its structure has been used in the walls of present houses and the overall structure and many elements are still visible.
A large part of the centre of the theatre is visible in an open area between a number of houses.
Two massive arches in via Anticaglia were reinforcement for the outside of the theatre and are incorporated into existing buildings.
The cavea had 5-6000 seats. The visible part is lower central cavea and includes one of the vomitoria still used for accessing the theatre. The summa cavea, the highest part, has been lost. The entrance to the cavea is from Via San Paolo through an ancient shop in the courtyard of a 15th-century building.