Royal mausolea
The impressive royal mausolea are divided into two major clusters namely Samma cluster and Tarkhan, Arghun, and Mughals cluster. The first cluster has tombs from the Samma period, while tombs from the Tarkhan, Arghun, and Mughals periods are clustered together.
The impressive royal mausolea are divided into two major clusters namely Samma cluster and Tarkhan, Arghun, and Mughals cluster. The first cluster has tombs from the Samma period, while tombs from the Tarkhan, Arghun, and Mughals periods are clustered together.
Samma cluster
Tombs dating from the Samma Dynasty are clustered together in a 5-acre section at the northern end of the necropolis. The Samma were Rajput princes, who seized control of Thatta in 1335. Samma tombs are strongly influenced by Gujarati styles, and incorporate Muslim and Hindu decorative elements.
The tomb of the King Jam Nizamuddin II, completed in 1510, is an impressive square structure measuring 11.4 metres on each side. It was built of sandstone and decorated with floral and geometric medallions. The cuboid shape of the tomb may be inspired by the Ka'aba in Makkah. Its dome was never built, thus leaving the interior exposed to the elements. The monument features a large and intricately carved Gujarati-style jharoka, or balcony, and a small peak atop it, which make the tomb resemble a temple. The exterior features 14 bands of decorative motifs that feature both Quranic verses and Hindu symbols, though in keeping with Islamic tradition, all decoration takes the form of geometric patterns, with the sole exception of a frieze depicting local ducks.
The tomb of Jam Nizamuddin's adoptive son, Darya Khan, resembles a Rajasthani fort, and was built after his death in 1521 Darya Khan had been born a slave, but rose to prominence as a general after defeating an Arghun army in battle. He was granted the title "Hero of Sindh," and was eventually made Madrul Muham, or Prime Minister.
Arghun, Trakhan, and Mughal cluster
The tomb of Isa Khan Tarkhan I, who ruled from 1554 to 1565, represents a departure from the funerary architecture of the Sammas. The tomb features a distinctly new cenotaph-style, and is laid out in a rectangular shape with its inner walls entirely covered with Quranic verses. The tomb also has an area dedicated for the graves of 5 of his royal ladies.
The mausoleum of Isa Khan Hussain II Tarkhan (d. 1651) features a two-story stone building with cupolas and balconies. The tomb is said to have been built during Isa's lifetime. Upon completion, legend states that Isa ordered the hands of the craftsmen to be cut off so that they would not be able to make another monument to rival his own.
The tomb of Jan Beg Tarkhan (d. 1600), is an octagonal brick structure whose dome is covered in blue and turquoise glazed tiles. Pavilion or canopy tombs (chattri maqbara or umbrella tomb) are another typical Indo-Islamic architectural feature, as well as enclosure tombs.
The Mughul period is represented by many tombs on the southern side of the necropolis, including the mausoleum of Mirza Jani and Mirza Ghazi Baig, that of Nawab Shurfa Khan, the enclosure of Mirza Muhammad Baqi Tarkhan and of Mirza Jan Baba as well as the impressive restored tomb of Nawab Isa Khan Tarkhan the Younger.