Overview of the history of Pristina
The city of Pristina has always been an area in flux with people coming and going. It has been inhabited for nearly 10.000 years.
The city of Pristina has always been an area in flux with people coming and going. It has been inhabited for nearly 10.000 years. The early Neolithic findings dating from the 8th century BC were discovered in the areas surrounding Pristina such as: Matiqan, Gracanica and Ulpiana.
In the Roman period, Pristina was part of the province of Dardania and nearby Ulpiana which was considered one of the most important Roman cities in the whole Balkans, became a Roman municipium in the 2nd century AD.
The city was damaged by an earthquake in AD 518 and it was again rebuilt by the Byzantine Emperor Justinian I who renamed it Iustiniana Secunda. By the arrival of Slavs in the 6th century, the city fell again in reconstruction.
During the 14th and the 15th century, Pristina was classified as an important mining and trading center on the Balkan market due to its position near the rich mining town of Novo Brdo. Pristina was famous for its trade fairs and items, such as goatskin and goat hair, as well as gunpowder produced by artisans from Pristina in 1485.
The first mosque in Pristina was built in the late 14th century, while under the Serbian rule.
Pristina was considered to be an important town in Medieval Serbia by having been a royal estate of Stefan Milutin, Stefan Uroš III, Stefan Dušan, Stefan Uroš V and Vuk Branković. In the early Ottoman era, Islam was spread increasingly throughout the population. In those years Pristina was part of the Vushtrri sancak and its 2.000 families enjoyed the peace and the stability of this era. During the 17th century, citizens of Pristina led by the Albanian priest Pjeter Bogdani vowed loyalty to the Austrian army and its troops.
A communist decision to make Pristina the capital of Kosovo happened in 1947 during a period of a rapid development and structural despair. A famous slogan spread during this period was “destroy the old, build the new”.