Canada
Canada: The Canadian Register of Historic Places, while it confers no historic designation or protection itself, endeavours to list all federal, provincial, territorial and local sites. Federal
National Historic Sites of Canada
Provincial
Alberta
Sites owned and run by the provincial government as a functioning historic site or museum are known as Provincial Historic Sites and Provincial Historic Areas.
Canada: The Canadian Register of Historic Places, while it confers no historic designation or protection itself, endeavours to list all federal, provincial, territorial and local sites.
Federal
National Historic Sites of Canada
Provincial
Alberta
Sites owned and run by the provincial government as a functioning historic site or museum are known as Provincial Historic Sites and Provincial Historic Areas. Buildings and sites owned by private citizens and companies or other levels or branches of government may gain one of two levels of historic designation, "Registered Historic Resource" or "Provincial Historic Resource". Historic designation in Alberta is governed by the Historic Resources Act. The province also lists buildings deemed historically significant by municipal governments on the Alberta Register of Historic Places, which is also part of the larger Canadian Register of Historic Places although this does not imply provincial or federal government status or protection. The Alberta Main Street Program helps to preserve historic buildings in the downtowns of smaller communities. The Heritage Survey Program is a survey of 80,000 historic buildings in Alberta, with no protective status.
British Columbia
Historic sites in British Columbia may be added to that province's register of historic places under section 18 of the Heritage Conservation Act.
New Brunswick
Places and areas designated under the Heritage Conservation Act (the New Brunswick Register of Historic Places acts as a register of sites designated under the Act)
Newfoundland
Heritage Foundation of Newfoundland and Labrador designated properties
Ontario
Properties designated under the Ontario Heritage Act
Quebec
Répertoire du patrimoine culturel du Québec
Local
Heritage buildings of Vancouver
City of Toronto Heritage Property Inventory
Register of Historic Resources in Edmonton