United Kingdom
United Kingdom
Heritage, culture, planning and conservation are devolved issues in the United Kingdom, and are dealt with by the governments of the constituent countries. England, which does not have its own devolved government, is covered by an agency of the United Kingdom government.
United Kingdom
Heritage, culture, planning and conservation are devolved issues in the United Kingdom, and are dealt with by the governments of the constituent countries. England, which does not have its own devolved government, is covered by an agency of the United Kingdom government.
See also historic environment records (HERs) and sites and monuments records (SMRs), maintained usually at a local government level (archaeological trusts in Wales).
The Schedule of Ancient Monuments (follows the pre-devolution Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Areas Act 1979)
England: Historic England, an executive agency of the Department for Culture, Media and Sport
The National Heritage List for England (launched May 2011). Contains list of all scheduled monuments, listed buildings, registered parks and gardens, historic wrecks and registered historic battlefields in England
Historic England Archive: formerly the National Monuments Record (England)
Register of Parks and Gardens
Registered battlefields
Protection of Wrecks Act 1973
Heritage at Risk Register
Northern Ireland: Both scheduled and listed buildings are registered and otherwise handled by the Department for Communities of the Northern Ireland Executive. (Until 16 May 2016, these roles were held by the Northern Ireland Environment Agency, an executive agency within the Department of the Environment.) Northern Ireland also has an additional register of state care monuments.
Northern Ireland Sites and Monuments Record
Listed Buildings
Historic Environment Record of Northern Ireland
Scotland:
Historic Environment Scotland, an executive agency of the Culture, Tourism and Major Events Directorate, part of the Scottish Government
Inventory of Historic Battlefields
Inventory of Gardens and Designed Landscapes in Scotland
National Record of the Historic Environment (NRHE): the archive formerly known as the National Monuments Record of Scotland (NMRS), and before that the Scottish National Buildings Record
Canmore: a database that is part of the NRHE
Wales:
Cadw, an agency of the Welsh Government
Scheduled monuments in Wales
Cadw/ICOMOS Register of Parks and Gardens of Special Historic Interest in Wales
Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Wales, a Welsh Government sponsored body
National Monuments Record of Wales (NMRW)
Coflein: the online database for the NMRW
Other Associated States or Territories
Although not part of the United Kingdom itself, these are self-governing states or territories with strong ties to the British Crown or the United Kingdom, often putting defence and foreign relations in to their hands while handling all other matters internally. All have the British Monarch as their head of state.
Crown Dependencies
The Crown Dependencies are three states which are possessions of the Crown, geographically in the British Isles or the Channel Islands.
Bailiwick of Guernsey: National Trust of Guernsey
Bailiwick of Jersey: States Assembly
Listed buildings in Jersey
Isle of Man: Manx National Heritage
Overseas Territories
The British Overseas Territories (also known as the "United Kingdom Overseas Territories") are the last remnants of the British Empire. There are fourteen total, however, not all of these have heritage registers.
Bermuda: Bermuda National Trust
Cayman Islands: National Trust for the Cayman Islands
Gibraltar: Ministry for Heritage together with the Gibraltar Heritage Trust
Falkland Islands: Historic Buildings Committee
Listed buildings in the Falkland Islands