England and Wales
Legislation
England
In England, the authority for listing is granted to the Secretary of State by the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990. Listed buildings in danger of decay are listed on the Historic England 'Heritage at Risk' Register.
Legislation
England
In England, the authority for listing is granted to the Secretary of State by the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990. Listed buildings in danger of decay are listed on the Historic England 'Heritage at Risk' Register.
In 1980, there was public outcry at the sudden destruction of the art deco Firestone Tyre Factory (Wallis, Gilbert and Partners, 1928–29). It was demolished over the August bank holiday weekend by its owners Trafalgar House, who had been told that it was likely to be 'spot-listed' a few days later. In response, the government undertook to review arrangements for listing buildings in order to protect worthy ones from such demolition. After the Firestone demolition, the Secretary of State for the Environment, Michael Heseltine, also initiated a complete re-survey of buildings to ensure that everything that merited preservation was on the lists.
In England, the Department for Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS) works with Historic England (an agency of the DCMS), and other government departments, e.g. Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government (MHCLG) and the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (DEFRA) to deliver the government policy on the protection to historic buildings and other heritage assets. The decision about whether or not to list a building is made by the Secretary of State, although the process is administered in England by Historic England.
Wales
The listed building system in Wales formerly also operated under the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990, as in England, until this was replaced in 2024 with Wales-specific heritage legislation.
In Wales, the authority for listing is granted to the Welsh Ministers by section 76 of the Historic Environment (Wales) Act 2023, although the listing system is in practice administered by Cadw.
English heritage protection reform
There have been several attempts to simplify the heritage planning process for listed buildings in England. As of 2021, few changes had been implemented.
The review process was started in February 2000 by Alan Howarth, then minister at the Department for Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS). The outcome was the paper "Power of Place" in December 2000, followed by the subsequent policy document "The Historic Environment: A Force for Our Future", published by the DCMS and the Department of the Environment, Transport and the Regions (DTLR) in December 2001. The launch of the Government's Heritage Protection Reform (HPR) report in July 2003 by the DCMS, entitled "Protecting our historic environment: Making the system work better", asked questions about how the current designation systems could be improved. The HPR decision report "Review of Heritage Protection: The Way Forward", a green paper published in June 2004 by the DCMS, committed the UK government and English Heritage to a process of reform, including a review of the criteria used for listing buildings.
A Review of Heritage Policy in 2006 was criticised, and the Government began a process of consultation on changes to Planning Policy Guidance 15, relating to the principles of selection for listing buildings in England.
The government's White Paper "Heritage Protection for the 21st Century", published on 8 March 2007, offered a commitment to sharing the understanding of the historic environment and more openness in the process of designation.
In 2008, a draft Heritage Protection Bill was subject to pre-legislative scrutiny before its passage through UK Parliament. The legislation was abandoned despite strong cross-party support, to make room in the parliamentary legislative programme for measures to deal with the credit crunch, though it may be revived in future. The proposal was that the existing registers of buildings, parks and gardens, archaeology and battlefields, maritime wrecks, and World Heritage Sites be merged into a single online register that will "explain what is special and why". English Heritage would become directly responsible for identifying historic assets in England and there would be wider consultation with the public and asset owners, and new rights of appeal. There would have been streamlined systems for granting consent for work on historic assets.
After several years of consultation with heritage groups, charities, local planning authorities, and English Heritage, in March 2010, the DCLG published Planning Policy Statement 5, "Planning for the Historic Environment". This replaced PPG15 and set out the government's national policies on the conservation of the historic environment in England. PPS5 was supported by a Practice Guide, endorsed by the DCLG, the DCMS, and English Heritage, which explained how to apply the policies stated in PPS5.
In December 2010, the Department for Communities and Local Government announced that in England all PPSs and Planning Policy Guidance Notes would be replaced by a single document, the National Planning Policy Framework. A consultation draft of this was published on 25 July 2011 and the final version on 27 March 2012. This became a material consideration in planning matters on publication. It has since been revised in 2018, 2019 and 2021.
Categories
The Historic Buildings and Monuments Commission in England and Cadw in Wales list buildings under three grades, with Grade I being the highest grade, as follows:
Grade I: buildings that are of exceptional interest
Grade II*: particularly important buildings of more than special interest
Grade II: buildings that are of special interest
There was formerly a non-statutory Grade III, which was abolished in 1970. Additionally, Grades A, B and C were used mainly for Anglican churches in active use, loosely corresponding to Grades I, II and III. These grades were used mainly before 1977, although a few buildings are still listed using these grades.
In 2010, listed buildings accounted for about 2% of English building stock. In March 2010, there were about 374,000 list entries, of which 92% were Grade II, 5.5% were Grade II* and 2.5% were Grade I. Places of worship are an important part of the UK's architectural heritage; England alone has 14,500 listed places of worship (4,000 Grade I, 4,500 Grade II* and 6,000 Grade II) and 45% of all Grade I listed buildings are places of worship. Some of the listed churches are no longer in use; between 1969 and 2010, some 1,795 churches were closed by the Church of England, equalling roughly 11% of the stock, with about a third listed as Grade I or Grade II.
As of 2025, there were approximately 30,000 listed buildings in Wales, of which around 91% were Grade II, around 7% were Grade II* and less than 2% were Grade I. In total, listed buildings accounted for less than 1% of Welsh building stock.
Statutory criteria
The criteria for listing include architectural interest, historic interest and close historical associations with significant people or events. Buildings not individually noteworthy may still be listed if they form part of a group that is—for example, all the buildings in a square. This is called 'group value'. Sometimes large areas comprising many buildings may not justify listing but receive the looser protection of designation as a conservation area.
The specific criteria include:
Age and rarity: The older a building is, the more likely it is to be listed. All buildings erected before 1700 that "contain a significant proportion of their original fabric" will be listed. Most buildings built between 1700 and 1840 are listed. After 1840 more selection is exercised and "particularly careful selection" is applied after 1945. Buildings less than 30 years old are rarely listed unless they are of outstanding quality and under threat.
Aesthetic merits: i.e. the appearance of a building. However, buildings that have little visual appeal may be listed on grounds of representing particular aspects of social or economic history.
Selectivity: where a large number of buildings of a similar type survive, the policy is only to list the most representative or significant examples.
National interest: significant or distinctive regional buildings; e.g. those that represent a nationally important but localised industry.
The state of repair of a building is not generally deemed to be a relevant consideration for listing.
Additionally:
Any buildings or structures constructed before 1 July 1948 that fall within the curtilage of a listed building are treated as part of the listed building.
The effect of a proposed development on the setting of a listed building is a material consideration in determining a planning application. Setting is defined as "the surroundings in which a heritage is experienced".
Although the decision to list a building may be made on the basis of the architectural or historic interest of one small part of the building, the listing protection nevertheless applies to the whole building. Listing applies not just to the exterior fabric of the building itself, but also to the interior, fixtures, fittings, and objects within the curtilage of the building even if they are not fixed. De-listing is possible but is rare. One example is Anmer Hall in Norfolk, which was listed in 1984 and de-listed in 1988.
Emergency measure
In an emergency, the local planning authority can serve a temporary "Building Preservation Notice" (BPN), if a building is in danger of demolition or alteration in such a way that might affect its historic character. This remains in force for six months until the Secretary of State decides whether or not to formally list the building.
Certificates of immunity
Until 2013 in England and 2016 in Wales, an application for a Certificate of Immunity from Listing (CoI) could only be made if planning permission was being sought or had been obtained.
However, following changes brought about by the Enterprise and Regulatory Reform Act 2013 in relation to England, and the Historic Environment (Wales) Act 2016 in relation to Wales, anyone can apply to either the Secretary of State (if a building is in England) or the Welsh Government (if a building is in Wales), to issue a Certificate of Immunity in respect of that building, at any time.
Alteration
In England and Wales, the management of listed buildings is the responsibility of local planning authorities and the Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government (i.e., not DCMS, which originally listed the building). There is a general principle that listed buildings are put to 'appropriate and viable use' and recognition that this may involve the re-use and modification of the building. However, listed buildings cannot be modified without first obtaining Listed Building Consent through the relevant local planning authority.
In Wales, applications are made using a form obtained from the relevant local authority. There is no provision for consent to be granted in outline. When a local authority is disposed to grant listed building consent, it must first notify the Welsh Parliament (i.e. Cadw) of the application. If the planning authority decides to refuse consent, it may do so without any reference to Cadw.
Carrying out unauthorised works to a listed building is a criminal offence and owners can be prosecuted. A planning authority can also insist that all work undertaken without consent be reversed at the owner's expense.
Examples of Grade I listed buildings
See also Category:Grade I listed buildings for more examples of such buildings across England and Wales.
Royal Albert Dock, Liverpool
Birmingham Town Hall, Birmingham
Blackpool Tower, Blackpool
Cenotaph, London
Chequers, Buckinghamshire
Clifton Suspension Bridge, Bristol
Hampton Court Palace, London
Humber Bridge, East Riding of Yorkshire / North Lincolnshire
Isokon Flats, Hampstead, London
King's College London Chapel, London
Liverpool Cathedral, Liverpool
Liverpool Metropolitan Cathedral, Liverpool
Lloyd's building, London
Manchester Liverpool Road railway station, Manchester
Montacute House, Somerset
Norwich Castle, Norwich
Palace of Westminster, London
Pontcysyllte Aqueduct, North Wales
Portchester Castle, Hampshire
Quarr Abbey, Isle of Wight
Tower Bridge, London
Tower of London, London
Warwick Castle, Warwick
Windsor Castle, Windsor
York Minster, York
Examples of Grade II* listed buildings
See also Category:Grade II* listed buildings for examples of such buildings across England and Wales.
Battersea Power Station, London
Capel Manor House, Horsmonden
Cleveland Bridge, Bath
Coliseum Theatre, London
Downe House, Richmond Hill, London
Manchester Town Hall Extension, Manchester
Middlesbrough Transporter Bridge, Middlesbrough
Middlesex Guildhall, London
Rise Hall, Rise
Shibden Hall, Calderdale
St John's Jerusalem, Sutton-at-Hone, Kent
Trellick Tower, London
Examples of Grade II listed buildings
See also Category:Grade II listed buildings for examples of such buildings across England and Wales.
Abbey Road Studios, London
Adelphi Hotel, Liverpool
Broomhill Pool, Ipswich
BT Tower, London
Birmingham Back to Backs, Birmingham
Bhaktivedanta Manor, Watford
India House, London
Kursaal, Southend-on-Sea
Crucible Theatre, Sheffield
Surbiton railway station, London
Whitechapel Bell Foundry, London
Footbridge just south of Wokingham railway station, Wokingham, Berkshire
Mixed designations
It is not unusual for historic sites, particularly large sites, to contain buildings with multiple, sometimes varying, designations. For example, Derwent Valley Mills, a World Heritage Site contains 838 listed buildings, made up of 16 listed at Grade I, 42 at Grade II* and 780 at Grade II. A further nine structures are scheduled monuments.
Locally listed buildings
Many councils, for example, Birmingham City Council and Crawley Borough Council, maintain a list of non-designated heritage assets (known informally as locally listed buildings) as separate to the statutory list (and in addition to it). There is no statutory protection of a building or object on the local heritage list but the National Planning Policy Framework states that "the effect of an
application on the significance of a non-designated heritage asset should be
taken into account". Many also receive a degree of protection from loss through being in a conservation area or through planning policy.