Asia
Afghanistan
A pair of 6th-century monumental statues known as the Buddhas of Bamiyan were dynamited by the Taliban in March 2001, who had declared them heretical idols. The world's oldest oil paintings were discovered in Bamiyan, though some were damaged by knives and attempts to destroy them.
Afghanistan
A pair of 6th-century monumental statues known as the Buddhas of Bamiyan were dynamited by the Taliban in March 2001, who had declared them heretical idols. The world's oldest oil paintings were discovered in Bamiyan, though some were damaged by knives and attempts to destroy them. These paintings, which were identified during UNESCO research in 2008, suffered significant harm from vandalism.
Armenia
A mosque in Yerevan was pulled down with a bulldozer at the beginning of the year 1990. Today only one mosque remains in working condition in the city, with a second mosque in dilapidated condition and partly converted to living quarters in Kond.
Azerbaijan
Azerbaijani authorities destroyed the Armenian cemetery in Julfa in December 2005, in the region of Nakhchivan. The Azerbaijani representative of Nakhchivan denied that there was an Armenian cemetery there in the first place.
Azerbaijani authorities demolished the Church of the Holy Virgin in Baku in 1992, as part of their "de-Armenisation" campaign, which also took place in the Armenian cemetery in Julfa. The rest was turned into a restaurant.
Azerbaijani authorities demolished the Kanach Zham of Shusha, in the disputed region of Nagorno-Karabakh, between December 2023 and April 2024.
Bahrain
At least 43 Shia mosques, including the ornate 400-year-old Amir Mohammed Braighi mosque, and many other religious structures were destroyed by the Bahraini government during the Bahraini uprising of 2011.
Bangladesh
Several landmarks associated with the founding leader of Bangladesh, Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, were destroyed or damaged in arson attacks and looting that followed the Non-cooperation movement (2024), including his former residence in Dhaka, which had been converted into the Bangabandhu Memorial Museum, as well as the Mujibnagar Memorial Complex. Other cultural institutions were also destroyed in the violence, including the 19th-century Bir Chandra Public Library in Comilla.
Cambodia
The Roman Catholic Cathedral of Phnom Penh was the first building to be destroyed by the Khmer Rouge after the establishment of their regime. The Cathedral of Battambang was also destroyed in 1975.
China
The Famen Temple went through several periods of destruction. First erected during the Eastern Han dynasty (AD 25–220), it was destroyed during the years of the Northern Zhou dynasty (557–581). After being rebuilt, it was destroyed again by an earthquake during the Longqing's years (1567–1572) of the Ming dynasty. After another reconstruction, it was destroyed again during the Cultural Revolution of 1966–1976. The present structure was completed in 1987 before being opened to the public as a museum in 1988.
The Huang Chao rebellion (874–884) devastated the city of Chang'an, a historical capital of several ancient Chinese empires. The city was sacked and occupied by the rebels who looted and demolished the buildings, whose materials were then reused to build the subsequent capital city of Luoyang. Chang'an never recovered after this obliteration, and it was followed by the decline of the Tang dynasty. Huang Chao's former lieutenant Zhu Wen completed the destruction by dismantling Chang'an and transporting the materials east to Luoyang.
During the systematic persecution of Buddhists in AD 845 by the Taoist Emperor Wuzong of Tang, more than 4,600 Buddhist temples were destroyed across the empire.
In 955, Emperor Shizong of the Later Zhou ordered the systematic destruction of Buddha statues for copper to mint coins. The ordinance led to the destruction of 3,336 of China's 6,030 Buddhist temples.
In 1739, the Pagoda of Chengtian Temple was destroyed after a large earthquake struck the city of Yinchuan. The pagoda was restored in 1820.
The Porcelain Tower of Nanjing, which dates back to the 15th century, was destroyed during the course of the Taiping Rebellion (1850–1864). A modern life-size replica was built in 2015.
In 1860, much of the Old Summer Palace, a Qing-era imperial palace, was set on fire and sacked during the Second Opium War. The palace was later sacked again and destroyed by the Eight-Nation Alliance when they invaded Beijing.
Beijing city fortifications which date back to the 15th–16th century were destroyed through the course of the decline of the Qing dynasty in the late 19th to early 20th century. They were severely damaged during the Boxer Rebellion (1898–1901), with the gate towers and watchtowers destroyed and troops of the Eight-Nation Alliance tearing down much of the Outer city walls. After the collapse of the Qing in 1912, and end of the Republic of China in 1949, the fortifications were dismantled to build modern ring roads around Beijing. Today, nothing of the Outer city remains intact.
In 1921, Buddhist murals at the Mogao Caves were damaged and vandalized by White Russian soldiers fleeing the Russian Civil War.
Buddhist murals at the Bezeklik Thousand Buddha Caves were damaged by the local Muslim population. The eyes and mouths in particular were often gouged out. Pieces of murals were also broken off for use as fertilizer by the locals.
During the Kumul Rebellion in Xinjiang in the 1930s, Buddhist murals were vandalized by Muslims.
Yongdingmen, the former front gate of the outer city wall of the Beijing city fortifications, which dates back to 1553, was demolished in the 1950s to make way for the new road system. It was rebuilt in 2005.
The Gate of China in Beijing was demolished by the Chinese government in 1954 to make way for the expansion of Tiananmen Square. The Chairman Mao Memorial Hall occupies the former site of the site of the gate.
A shrine dedicated to Wei Yan was destroyed by the Chinese government in 1968. A stone tablet which contained the record of his presence was lost after the demolition. The shrine was rebuilt in 1995.
During the Cultural Revolution of the 1960s and 1970s, many artifacts, monuments, and buildings belonging to the Four Olds were attacked and destroyed, including:
White Horse Temple in Luoyang, the oldest Buddhist temple in China. Some historical artifacts are still missing.
Famen Buddhist Temple, Shaanxi.
Tomb contents and human remains from the Ding Mausoleum, the tomb of Ming Emperor Wanli and his empresses.
China's development has resulted in the destruction of more than 30,000 items listed by the China's National Cultural Heritage Administration, compiled from various archaeological and historic sites. One conservation campaigner reported that the rate of destruction is worse than during the Cultural Revolution. Destroyed heritage sites include the old town in Dinghai, the old town of Laoximen in Shanghai, a centuries-old market street in Qianmen, and a section of the Great Wall of China. Historical neighborhoods of Beijing and Nanjing were also razed.
The construction of the Three Gorges Dam on the Yangtze River caused water levels to rise, destroying entire cities and historical locations along the river.
In 2016, the Chinese government ordered the demolition of historical houses in the Larung Gar Tibetan Buddhist institution.
By 2017, the old town of Kashgar had been destroyed by the Chinese government, and replaced by a significantly smaller and lower-quality "theme park" version of the site.
During the 2020 China floods, multiple historic bridges were destroyed, including the Lecheng Bridge and the Zhenhai Bridge.
Georgia
A fire in 2024 destroyed the National Art Gallery in Sukhumi and all but 150 of its collection of 4,000 paintings.
India
In 1024, during the reign of Bhima I, the prominent Afghan ruler Mahmud of Ghazni raided Gujarat, plundered and destroyed the Somnath temple and broke its jyotirlinga. In 1299, Alauddin Khalji's army under the leadership of Ulugh Khan defeated Karandev II of the Vaghela dynasty, and sacked the (rebuilt) Somnath temple. By 1665, the rebuilt temple was once again ordered destroyed by Mughal emperor Aurangzeb. In 1702, he ordered that if Hindus had revived worship there, it should be demolished completely.
Around 1200 CE, the most prominent seats of learning in Ancient India, Nalanda University, Buddhist Monasteries and the educational centers of Vikramasila and Odantapuri were sacked and destroyed by Bengal ruler Muhammad bin Bakhtiyar Khalji.
The famous Martand Sun Temple, located in Jammu and Kashmir, was destroyed by Sultan Sikandar Butshikan in the early 15th century, with demolition lasting a year.
In 14th century Hampi, the second biggest city in the world at the time, was destroyed by the armies of the Delhi Sultanate, those of Alauddin Khalji and Muhammad bin Tughlaq.
In 1565 CE, after the Battle of Talikota, the capital city of Vijayanagara, was sacked and destroyed by an invading army raised by the five Bahamani Sultanates. What remains now are the ruins of Hampi.
The Shiva temples of Puneshwar and Narayaneshwar in the city of Pune were destroyed by the invading army of Alauddin Khalji. Later a tomb of a Muslim preacher was erected at the sites.
In 1664, Aurangzeb destroyed the Kashi Vishwanath Mandir and built the Gyanvapi Mosque over its walls. The remnants of the temple wall can still be seen today, as depicted in the 19th century sketch by James Prinsep.
On 26 April 2016, the National Museum of Natural History, New Delhi, and its valuable collection of animal fossils and taxidermy animals was destroyed by fire.
The Nalanda University, one of the oldest residential universities in the world, was destroyed in 1193 AD by Bakhtiyar Khilji. The library, known for its vast collection of manuscripts, was set on fire, reportedly burning for several months.
The Martand Sun Temple in Jammu and Kashmir, an important Hindu temple built in the 8th century, was destroyed in the 15th century during the reign of Sultan Sikandar.
Indonesia
Kraton Majapahit, the royal palace of Majapahit emperors, was destroyed in a rebellion. What remained of the palace and fortifications around it was further looted by treasure hunters during the Dutch colonial era.
Iran
In 330 BC, Alexander the Great sent the main force of his army to Persepolis by the Royal Road and destroyed it.
During the reign of Naser al-Din Shah Qajar, Nahavand Castle was ruined hoping to find treasures beneath.
In 861 AD, a sacred tree in Zoroastrianism called the Cypress of Kashmar was felled on the order of Abbasid caliph Al-Mutawakkil.
Iraq
The Hanging Gardens of Babylon, one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World, are believed to have been destroyed sometime after the 1st century AD. Their existence is not confirmed by archaeology, and there have been suggestions that the gardens were purely mythical.
The Round City of Baghdad, the seat of the Abbasid caliph, was sacked by the Mongols led by Hulegu in 1258. Large sections of the city as well as irrigation system and the House of Wisdom, a library and intellectual center, were destroyed. The city was attacked again by Tamerlane in 1401, leading to the almost destruction.
Several historical gates of Baghdad dating back to the 12th century were demolished by the occupying Allied and Ottoman forces during the First World War.
Since the U.S.-led invasion of Iraq in 2003, various archaeological sites and museums have been looted, including the ancient cities of Adab, Hatra and Isin where U.S. military protection was absent. The most prominent among them being the Iraq Museum where as much as 170,000 items were looted, including the 5,000 year old statues. In addition, several sites such as Babylon saw the destruction of its archaeology-rich subsoil as a result of military planning.
During the Iraqi Civil War (2006–2008), several historical sites were destroyed by various groups. In 2006 and 2007, Al-Askari Mosque was bombed by Sunni militants twice in the course of two years. In 2006, the Minaret of Anah and the statue of Al-Mansur were bombed by Shia militants and destroyed. The buildings were later reconstructed.
The Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) destroyed much of the cultural heritage in the areas it controlled in Iraq. At least 28 religious buildings were looted and destroyed, including Shiite mosques, tombs, shrines and churches. Numerous ancient and medieval sites and artifacts, including the ancient cities of Nimrud and Hatra, parts of the wall of Nineveh, the ruins of Bash Tapia Castle and Dair Mar Elia, and artifacts from the Mosul Museum were also destroyed. However, from 2018, a year after IS was defeated and driven out of Mosul, many churches, mosques and historic buildings were rebuilt.
Palestine
The First Temple in Jerusalem was destroyed by the Neo-Babylonian Empire in 587/586 BCE, and the Second Temple by the Roman Empire in 70 CE.
Following the conquest of the Old City of Jerusalem by the Arab Legion in 1948, under the Jordanian annexation, Jewish sites were systematically damaged and destroyed. In particular, all but one of the thirty-five synagogues of the Jewish Quarter were destroyed.
The Shrine of Husayn's Head was built by the Fatimids on a hilltop adjacent to Ascalon that was reputed to have held the head of Husayn ibn Ali between c. 906 CE and 1153 CE. It was described as the most magnificent building in the ancient city, and developed into the most important and holiest Shi'a site in Palestine. The shrine was destroyed in 1950 by the Israeli army, more than a year after hostilities ended, on the orders of Moshe Dayan. This was in accordance with a 1950s Israeli policy of erasing Muslim historical sites within Israel, and in line with efforts to expel the remaining Palestinian Arabs from the region.
Following Israel's victory during the 1967 Six-Day War the Israeli military destroyed a large part of the Moroccan Quarter in Jerusalem's Old Town to make room for a plaza in front of the Western Wall.
In the 1970s a Late Neolithic archaeological site was bulldozed for the construction of Shiqma Reservoir near Zikim, a kibbutz in Israel.
The Baptist Church of Jerusalem in Narkis Street was burned down in 1982 in a suspected arson, and subjected to an arson attack in 2007.
In 1996, the Jerusalem Islamic Waqf began unauthorized construction on the Temple Mount, damaging ancient structures and weakening the stability of the Southern Wall. 300 truckloads of topsoil were excavated and dumped in the Kidron Valley without permitting proper archaeological care. (See Temple Mount Sifting Project).
In 2015, in one of a series of attacks on churches in Israel and the West Bank by Jewish extremist groups, a former settler on the West Bank torched and set fire to the Church of the Multiplication in Tabgha on the shore of the Sea of Galilee in northern Israel. This was the church where some Christians believe Jesus to have carried out his miracle of the feeding of the 5000.
Joseph's Tomb in the city of Nablus has been repeatedly vandalized, with Palestinian mobs burning and pillaging it immediately after the withdrawal of Israeli forces in 2000, in 2003, and in 2009, when the tomb was vandalized with graffiti including swastikas. The tomb was vandalized again by Palestinian rioters in 2015 and 2022.
During the Gaza war, Israel damaged or destroyed more than 100 heritage sites in Gaza, including the Church of Saint Porphyrius, the Great Mosque of Gaza, and the Rafah Museum. This figure was reached by mid-November 2023.
Japan
The majority of Japanese castles were smashed and destroyed in the late 19th century during the Meiji restoration. This was done by the Japanese people and government in order to modernize and westernize Japan and break from their past feudal era of the Daimyo and Shoguns. Concrete replicas of the castles were built for tourists prior to the 1964 Summer Olympics in Japan. The vast majority of castles in Japan today are new replicas made out of concrete. In 1959 a concrete keep was built for Nagoya castle.
An earth wall with uneven stones made up the original base of Komine Castle before it collapsed in the 1970s due to rain. The Japanese local government repaired it with concrete and the entire section of the repaired wall was destroyed by the earthquake in 2011 due to using concrete. The Japanese government then sought photographs of the original wall from local citizens as they had no references to repair it to its original state.
The destroyed Kumamoto Castle, Fushimi Castle, Hiroshima Castle were rebuilt with concrete after World War II and Tokyo Imperial Palace was rebuilt after World War II. Kinkaku-ji was rebuilt after a monk burned it down. Kyoto Imperial Palace was rebuilt in 1855.
Ryōunkaku, Japan's first skyscraper, was severely damaged during the 1923 Great Kantō earthquake. 12 people inside the tower were killed and another injured. It was demolished less than a month later on 23 September 1923.
The Japanese used mostly concrete in 1934 to rebuild the Togetsukyo Bridge, unlike the original destroyed wooden version of the bridge from 836.
Horyuji temple was rebuilt referencing historic paintings.
During the Meiji restoration's Shinbutsu bunri, tens of thousands of Buddhist religious statues and temples were destroyed. The government then closed tens of thousands of traditional Shinto shrines under the Shrine Consolidation Policy. The Meiji government built the new modern 15 shrines of the Kenmu restoration as a political move to link the Meiji restoration to the Kenmu restoration for their new State Shinto cult.
The Bodhisattva Avalokiteśvara (Kannon) statue at a temple Ryozen Kannon in Kyoto was rebuilt with concrete after World War II.
In 1958 the Kannon-do temple at the Senso-ji Temple in Tokyo was rebuilt with concrete after it was destroyed in 1945 during World War II.
Kumamoto Castle, Kumamoto: Seriously damaged in 1877 during the Siege of Kumamoto Castle, part of the larger Satsuma Rebellion; subsequently rebuilt in the 1960s, with further historical restoration work completed from 1998 to 2008. The castle was again seriously damaged during 2016 Kumamoto earthquakes, with the required rebuilding effort estimated to take several decades.
Shuri Castle, a palace of the Ryukyu Kingdom first built in the 14th century, was destroyed during the Battle of Okinawa in World War II. Japanese forces had set up a defense perimeter which went through the underground of the castle. The battleship USS Mississippi shelled the location for three days in May 1945. The castle burned down after. It was later reconstructed in the 1990s. On the morning of 31 October 2019, the main courtyard structures of the castle were again destroyed in a fire.
The Kinkaku-ji (Golden Pavilion) of Kyoto was burnt down by an arsonist in 1950, and was restored in 1955.
A large number of Important Cultural Property, libraries, museums, and other archives were damaged or destroyed by the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami.
Lebanon
On 9 October 2024, during the Israeli invasion of Lebanon, a 19th-century church in Derdghaya was destroyed by an IDF airstrike.
Tibnin Castle was damaged during the Israeli invasion of Lebanon in 2024 and one of its walls collapsed.
Malaysia
Candi Number 11, also known as Candi Sungai Batu Estate, a 1,200 year old ruin of a tomb-temple located in the Bujang Valley historical complex in Kedah, was demolished in 2013 by housing developers who claimed not to have known the historical significance of the stone edifice.
Maldives
On 7 February 2012, in the aftermath of the coup in which President Mohamed Nasheed was overthrown, the National Museum was stormed by Islamists who destroyed Buddhist artifacts. Most of the Buddhist physical history of the Maldives was obliterated. Hindu artifacts were also targeted for obliteration and the actions have been compared to the attacks on the Buddhas by the Taliban.
Myanmar
Mandalay Palace, a former 19th century royal palace of the Burmese kings, was burned down to the ground in 1945 during the Battle of Mandalay between Allied and Japanese forces.
Shwedagon Paya temple complex in Yangon, built between 6th and 10th centuries AD, was severely damaged when Cyclone Nargis struck the region in 2008, which caused the worst natural disaster in the recorded history of Myanmar.
Nepal
The 7.8 Mw Nepal earthquake in 2015 demolished heritage sites in Kathmandu valley. It destroyed centuries old medieval temples and palaces in the Kathmandu, Bhaktapur and Patan Durbar Squares along with the tower of Dharahara, the temple of Changunarayan, some temples of the Pahupatinath complex, the main stupa of Boudhanath and the temples of Swayambhunath Stupa.
Singha Darbar destroyed during September 2025 Nepalese Protests.
International Convention Centre destroyed during September 2025 Nepalese Protests.
Oman
The Arabian Oryx Sanctuary became the first of now three Former UNESCO World Heritage Sites in 2007. It was delisted by UNESCO after having been reduced to a tenth of its size to allow for oil-drilling
Pakistan
The archaeological site of Harappa which dated back to 2600 BCE was heavily damaged during the Indian Rebellion of 1857. Bricks from the ruins were brought out and used as track ballast during the construction of Lahore–Multan railway line. Since the discovery, the site was damaged by the local farmers in the process of turning it into an agriculture land.
The Multan Sun Temple, a grand Hindu temple dedicated to the Sun deity built in 614 CE or earlier, was destroyed in the late 10th century by Ismaili rulers. A mosque was built atop it, which was also destroyed in the 11th century by Mahmud of Ghazni. The ruins of the temple exist in modern-day Multan, Pakistan.
The Prahladpuri Temple, Multan, was destroyed by Muslims in 1992 in the aftermath of Babri mosque destruction in India.
The Shaheed Ganj Mosque in Lahore was demolished by the Sikhs in 1935. Sikhs had been occupying the public square near the mosque since the capture of Lahore by Bhangi Misl in the 18th century. The conflict concerning the mosque had heightened during the colonial era, as Muslims were forbidden to pray there by the mosque administration. The demolishing of the mosque had led to the Muslims protesters holding marches toward the mosque, which was dispersed by the police opening fire on them.
Looters and the Taliban destroyed much of Pakistan's Buddhist artifacts left over from the Buddhist Gandhara civilization especially in Swat Valley. Gandhara Buddhist relics were deliberately targeted by the Taliban for destruction, and illegally looted by smugglers. Kushan era Buddhist stupas and statues in Swat valley, including the Jehanabad Buddha's face, were demolished by the Taliban. The government was criticized for doing nothing to safeguard the statue after the initial attempt at destroying the Buddha, which did not cause permanent harm, and when the second attack took place on the statue the feet, shoulders, and face were demolished. A rehabilitation attempt on the Buddha was made by Luca Olivieri and a group from Italy.
Philippines
During the Spanish Colonization of the Philippine islands, the Spanish observed native structures called Kota or citadels made of large wooden houses or lime stones which made up the ancient cosmopolitan city-states of Luzon, Visayas and even in Mindanao.
The City of Cainta was a fortified city. According to the descriptions by early Spanish chroniclers, it was surrounded by bamboo thickets, defended by a log wall, stone bulwarks and several lantakas, and an arm of the Pasig River flowed through the middle of the city, dividing it into two settlements. It had a population with about a thousand inhabitants. As described in the anonymous 1572 account documented in Volume 3 of Blair and Robertson's compiled translations: In August 1571, Miguel Lopez de Legazpi assigned his nephew, Juan de Salcedo, to "pacify" Cainta. After travelling several days upriver, Salcedo lay siege to the city, and eventually found a weak spot on the wall. The final Spanish attack over 400 residents of Cainta killed including their leader Gat Maitan.
Kota Selurong was the walled city of Manila along the south bank of the Pasig River. Kota Seludong, the seat of the power of the Kingdom of Maynila that was protected by a rammed earth fortress equipped with stockades, battlements and cannons. the Kota were destroyed in 1570 siege, after the Spanish forces invaded the city and Martin de Goiti ordered his men to set the city in fire.
During the Battle of Manila in 1945, most of the city's unique architecture was destroyed. After the battle, in the business district, only two buildings dating to before the war remained intact, and these buildings' plumbing had been looted. After the war ended, much of Manila was rebuilt in a modernist style, and thus the original architectural heritage of the city is largely lost.
Manila Jai Alai Building, a historic jai alai venue demolished in 2000 which was opposed by heritage conservationists. The demolition led to the passage of the National Cultural Heritage Act of 2009.
Several historic buildings were damaged or destroyed during the 2013 Bohol earthquake, including the Loboc Church, the Loon Church, the Maribojoc Church and the Baclayon Church.
The Philippine Su Kuang Institute building was demolished in 2017 after the owners sold the building to a private developer within the same year. The 1940s era building was the last Art Deco wooden school structure in Binondo, Manila.
In 2023, the Manila Post Palace burned down, destroying their valuable stamp collection.
Saudi Arabia
Various mosques and other historic sites such as the Ajyad Fortress, especially those relating to early Islam, have been destroyed in Saudi Arabia. This is done both for economic reasons, to create room to accommodate hajj pilgrims (including luxury facilities for wealthy guests) and for ideological reasons related to the iconoclastic religious doctrine of the state Wahhabi sect. The Ajyad Fortress of the Ottomans was demolished for commercial development of the Mecca Royal Hotel Clock Tower.
Singapore
The Singapore Stone was blown up in 1843 to make way for Fort Fullerton. One fragment survives and is currently displayed at the National Museum of Singapore. It has been designated as a national treasure of Singapore.
South Korea
Hwangnyongsa, a Buddhist temple in Gyeongju which dates back to the 7th century, was burned down by the Mongolians during their invasion in 1238.
Hundreds of Buddhist monasteries were shut down or destroyed during the Joseon period as a part of anti-Buddhism policy. In 1407, during the reign of Taejong, the regulations were imposed on the number of Buddhist temples which limited to 88. Sejong the Great further reduced the number to 36. Many Buddhist statues were also destroyed during the reign of Jungjong (1506–1544).
The 1954 Busan Yongdusan fires destroyed many important cultural and historical artifacts in storage, most prominently 30 of the 48 remaining Portraits of Joseon Dynasty Royals, with most of the remaining portraits heavily damaged.
Namdaemun was damaged by arson in 2008. It reopened in 2013.
In March 2021, a main hall of the historic Naejangsan temple in Jeongeup, was burned into ashes by a 53-year-old monk arsonist.
Sri Lanka
The Palace of King Parakramabahu I of Polonnaruwa was set on fire by the Kalinga Magha-led Indian invaders in the 11th century. The ruins and the effect of the fire is still visible.
The Library of Jaffna, which had over 97,000 manuscripts, was burned in 1981, as a precursor to the Sri Lankan civil war.
Syria
The Aleppo Codex, the authoritative Hebrew Bible text, was partially destroyed during anti-Jewish riots in Syria in 1947.
Much of Syria's cultural heritage was damaged, destroyed, or looted during the Syrian Civil War. Destroyed buildings include the minaret of the Great Mosque of Aleppo and the Al-Madina Souq, while others such as Krak des Chevaliers were damaged.
Khusruwiyah Mosque (Husrev Mosque).
The Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) destroyed the Lion of Al-lāt, the temples of Bel and Baalshamin, the Arch of Triumph, and other sites in Palmyra. The group also destroyed the Monastery of St. Elian, the Armenian Genocide Memorial Church, and several ancient sculptures in the city of Raqqa.
During the Turkish military operation in Afrin in 2018, Turkish shelling seriously damaged the ancient temple of Ain Dara in Afrin.
Thailand
The historical Bangkok tramway system, opened in 1888, ended its operations in 1968.
The original Dusit Zoo, in Bangkok, Thailand, built in 1938, was demolished in 2018.
The Parliament House of Thailand, which housed the Legislative Branch of the Government of Thailand from 1974 to 2018, was demolished in 2019.
Turkey
The Library of Antioch was ordered destroyed by the Roman Emperor Jovian in 363 AD.
The Temple of Artemis, one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World, was destroyed by arson in 356 BC. It was later rebuilt, but was damaged in a raid by Goths in 268 AD. Its stones were subsequently used in other buildings. A few fragments of the structure still survive in situ.
The Mausoleum at Halicarnassus, another Wonder of the Ancient World, was destroyed by a series of earthquakes between the 12th and 15th centuries. Most of the remaining marble blocks were burnt into lime, but some were used in the construction of Bodrum Castle by the Knights Hospitaller, where they can still be seen today. The only other surviving remains of the mausoleum are some foundations in situ, a few sculptures in the British Museum, and some marble blocks which were used to build a dockyard in Malta's Grand Harbour
Port city of İzmir (Smyrna) during the Great fire of Smyrna in the aftermath of the Greco-Turkish war.
The abandonment and confiscation of Armenian monasteries and cultural heritage in places such as Ani contributed to their eventual destruction. In 1974, UNESCO stated that after 1923, out of 913 Armenian historical monuments left in Eastern Turkey, 464 had vanished completely, 252 were in ruins, and 197 needed repair. In 2011, there were 34 Armenian churches functioning in Turkey, primarily in Istanbul.
Turkmenistan
The Church of the Transfiguration in Ashgabat was destroyed in 1932 by the Soviet Government.
The country's only Bahá'í Temple, in Ashgabat (called Ishqabad by its followers) which was completed in 1908 was later destroyed in 1962 after being damaged in the 1948 Earthquake.