Scotland
Background and overview
In Scotland, listing was begun by a provision in the Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 1947, and the current legislative basis for listing is the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) (Scotland) Act 1997. As with other matters regarding planning, conservation is a power devolved to the Scottish Parliament and the Scottish Government.
Background and overview
In Scotland, listing was begun by a provision in the Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 1947, and the current legislative basis for listing is the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) (Scotland) Act 1997. As with other matters regarding planning, conservation is a power devolved to the Scottish Parliament and the Scottish Government. The authority for listing rests with Historic Environment Scotland (formerly Historic Scotland), an executive agency of the Scottish Government, which inherited this role from the Scottish Development Department in 1991. The listing system is administered by Historic Environment Scotland on behalf of the Scottish Ministers.
Listed building consent must be obtained from local authorities before any alteration to a listed structure. Applications for consent are made on a form obtained from Historic Environment Scotland. After consulting the local planning authority, the owner, where possible, and an independent third party, Historic Environment Scotland makes a recommendation on behalf of the Scottish Ministers.
Categories
The scheme for classifying buildings is:
Category A: "Buildings of special architectural or historic interest which are outstanding examples of a particular period, style or building type."
Category B: "Buildings of special architectural or historic interest which are major examples of a particular period, style or building type."
Category C: "Buildings of special architectural or historic interest which are representative examples of a period, style or building type."
There are about 47,400 listed buildings in Scotland. Of these, around 8 percent (some 3,800) are Category A, 50 percent are Category B, and 42 percent are listed at Category C.
Examples of Category A listed buildings
St Peter's Seminary, Cardross
Palace of Holyroodhouse, Edinburgh
Ravelston Garden, Edinburgh
1 Prince's Terrace, Glasgow
Glasgow Cathedral, Glasgow
Glasgow City Chambers, Glasgow
Craigellachie Bridge, Moray
The Kirna, Walkerburn
Examples of Category B listed buildings
Balmoral Hotel, Edinburgh
Harbourmaster's House, Dysart, Fife
Perth Theatre, Perth
Sabhal Mòr Ostaig, Isle of Skye
Torloisk House, Isle of Mull
Examples of Category C listed buildings
The Belmont Cinema, Aberdeen
St John's Cathedral, Oban, Argyll
Craigend Castle, East Dunbartonshire
The George Cinema, Portobello, Edinburgh