South America
Argentina
Several grand buildings in Buenos Aires were demolished over years, including Pabellón Argentino, Grand Hotel, Ortiz Basualdo Palace, Unzué Palace, Odeón Theater, Coliseo Theater and various palaces in Avenida Alvear. In 1935 the old church of San Nicholás of Bari was demolished to make way for 9 de Julio Avenue, whose construction demanded the razing of multiple city blocks, including several mansions along for example Cerrito St.
Argentina
Several grand buildings in Buenos Aires were demolished over years, including Pabellón Argentino, Grand Hotel, Ortiz Basualdo Palace, Unzué Palace, Odeón Theater, Coliseo Theater and various palaces in Avenida Alvear.
In 1935 the old church of San Nicholás of Bari was demolished to make way for 9 de Julio Avenue, whose construction demanded the razing of multiple city blocks, including several mansions along for example Cerrito St. The church was later rebuilt on another location.
In response to the Bombing of Plaza de Mayo in 1955 several churches in Buenos Aires were burned and looted, including Santo Domingo convent, St. Ignatius Church, Basilica of San Francesco, St. Michael's Church and Basilica of Saint Nicholas of Bari. The ornate building of the Jockey Club on Florida Avenue was also destroyed.
Historic buildings in the city of San Juan were destroyed by an earthquake in 1944, including the Cathedral and the Government House.
The 1773 Marquez Bridge over the Reconquista River was renewed in 1964 and declared a National Historic Monument of Argentina. In 1997, the Company Autopistas del Oeste demolished it.
On 18 October 1977, a fire burned the Teatro Argentino to the ground in La Plata. The building was later rebuilt, but in a different style.
On 3 April 1979 a fire destroyed about half of the Hotel Castilla along Avenida de Mayo. The ornate Avenida Theatre housed inside survived intact, but the destroyed portions of the building have not been rebuilt.
Brazil
On 8 July 1978, the Museum of Modern Art of Rio de Janeiro was destroyed by fire.
On 17 May 2010, the natural history collection of the Instituto Butantan was destroyed by fire.
On 2 September 2018, the National Museum of Brazil was destroyed by fire.
Peru
Many of the quipu, an Andea system of encoding information in ropes via color and knots used by the Inca and other civilizations have been lost to decay of organic material and deliberate destruction. The knowledge of reading quipu was still present well into the colonial era but has since been lost.
Uruguay
On 16 July 1969, an original Flag of the Treinta y Tres from the Cisplatine War was stolen from the history museum by a revolutionary group called OPR-33. The historical flag was last seen in 1975 in Buenos Aires but has been considered missing since the day of its theft. This is still a matter of political debate.
Venezuela
On 17 October 2004, a fire in the Parque Central Complex of Caracas, Venezuela, destroyed the tower's planoteca, an archive containing the entire history of the country's public building plans spanning two centuries, including aqueduct and sewer systems.