Substantial survivals
Most of the best survivals had been converted to churches (and sometimes later mosques), which some remain. Often the porticos were walled in between the columns, and the original cella front and side walls largely removed to create a large single space in the interior.
Most of the best survivals had been converted to churches (and sometimes later mosques), which some remain. Often the porticos were walled in between the columns, and the original cella front and side walls largely removed to create a large single space in the interior. Rural areas in the Islamic world have some good remains, which had been left largely undisturbed. In Spain some remarkable discoveries (Vic, Cordoba, Barcelona) were made in the 19th century when old buildings being reconstructed or demolished were found to contain major remains encased in later buildings. In Rome, Pula, and elsewhere some walls incorporated in later buildings have always been evident.
The squared-off blocks of temple walls have always been attractive for later builders to reuse, while the large pieces of massive columns were less easy to remove and make use of; hence the podium, minus facing, and some columns are often all that remain. In most cases loose pieces of stone have been removed from the site, and some such as capitals may be found in local museums, along with non-architectural items excavated, such as terracotta votive statuettes or amulets, which are often found in large numbers. Very little indeed survives in place from the significant quantities of large sculpture that originally decorated temples.
Rome
Pantheon or Temple to All The Gods, unique among Roman temples, but later much imitated. Easily the most impressive and complete interior to survive.
Temple of Hercules Victor, early circular temple, largely complete
Temple of Portunus or "Temple of Fortuna Virilis" – very complete Ionic exterior, near Santa Maria in Cosmedin and the Temple of Romulus
Temple of Romulus – very complete circular exterior, early 4th century, Roman Forum
Temple of Antoninus and Faustina – the core of the building survives as a church, including parts of the frieze, Roman Forum
Temple of Hadrian – Campus Martius – a huge wall with 11 columns, now incorporated in a later building
Temple of Vesta – small circular temple, part complete, Roman Forum
Temple of Saturn – 8 impressive columns and architrave remain standing, west end of the Roman Forum
Temple of Bellona (Ostia) – small back-street all-brick temple at the port.
Elsewhere
Palestrina, Sanctuary of Fortuna Primigenia, (see above) a large complex leading to a small shrine
Temple of Apollo (Pompeii), unusually, it is the smaller elements that are best preserved, and the surrounding forum
Temple of Vesta – Tivoli, so-called, circular
Capitolium of Brixia, Brescia, buried by a landslide and partly reconstructed
Maison Carrée – Nîmes, Southern France, one of the most complete survivals
Temple of Augustus and Livia – Vienne, France, exterior largely complete
Temple of Augustus (Pula) – Pula, Croatia, largely complete (illustrated above); a large wall from another temple forms part of the town hall next door.
Roman Temple of Évora – Évora, Portugal, impressive partial remains of a small temple; podium and columns, but no cella.
Temple of Jupiter in Diocletian's Palace, Split, Croatia. Small but very complete, amid other Roman buildings, c. 300. Most unusually, the barrel ceiling is intact.
Roman temple of Alcántara, Spain, tiny but complete
Roman temple of Vic, Spain. Substantially rebuilt, after it was found covered by a castle.
Roman temple of Córdoba, Spain. Base and 11 Corinthian columns, found inside later buildings.
Temple of Bacchus, Baalbek, Lebanon, a famous exotic "Baroque" pilgrimage destination, very largely preserved, including the interior.
Temples of Jupiter and Venus, Baalbek
Temple of Artemis (Jerash), Jordan; partial remains of two other temples
Sbeitla, Tunisia, three small temples in a row on the forum, many other city ruins.
Dougga, Tunisia, several temples in extensive city ruins, two with substantial remains.
Garni Temple, Armenia. 1st-century, reconstructed after earthquake in 1679. The only extant Greco-Roman temple in Armenia and the former Soviet Union, described as the "easternmost building of the Graeco-Roman world".