List of ancient Roman temples
This is a list of ancient Roman temples, built during antiquity by the people of ancient Rome or peoples belonging to the Roman Empire. Roman temples were dedicated to divinities from the Roman pantheon.
This is a list of ancient Roman temples, built during antiquity by the people of ancient Rome or peoples belonging to the Roman Empire. Roman temples were dedicated to divinities from the Roman pantheon.
Substantial remains
Most of the best survivals had been converted into churches and mosques. Rural areas in the Islamic world have some good remains, which had been left largely undisturbed. In Spain, some remarkable discoveries (Vic, Cordoba, Barcelona) were made in the 19th century, when old buildings being reconstructed or demolished were found to contain major remains encased in later buildings. In Rome, Pula, and elsewhere some walls incorporated in later buildings have always been evident. In most cases loose pieces of stone have been removed from the site, and some such as capitals may be found in local museums, along with non-architectural items excavated, such as terracotta votive offerings, which are often found in large numbers.
Rome
Pantheon or Temple to All The Gods – Campus Martius
Temple of Antoninus and Faustina, the core of the building survives as a church, including parts of the frieze, – Roman Forum
Temple of Hadrian, a huge wall with eleven columns, now incorporated in a later building – Campus Martius
Temple of Hercules Victor, early circular temple, largely complete
Nymphaeum often called (erroneously) the Temple of Minerva Medica
Temple of Portunus (formerly called the Temple of Fortuna Virilis), near Santa Maria in Cosmedin and the Temple of Hercules Victor
Temple of Romulus, very complete circular exterior, early 4th century – Roman Forum
Temple of Saturn, eight impressive columns and architrave remain standing, west end of the Roman Forum
Temple of Vesta, small circular temple, part complete – Roman Forum
Italy (outside Rome)
Palestrina, Sanctuary of Fortuna Primigenia, (see above) a large complex leading to a small shrine
Temple of Apollo (Pompeii), unusually, it is the smaller elements that are best preserved, and the surrounding forum
Temple of Bellona, Ostia, small back-street all-brick temple at the port.
Temple of Diana Umbronensis, a temple to Diana near Scoglietto
Temple of Vesta, Tivoli, so-called, circular
Capitolium of Brixia, Brescia, buried by a landslide and partly reconstructed
Temple of Minerva, Assisi, preserved façade with six Corynthian columns, architrave and pediment.
Temple of Augustus, Pozzuoli, pseudoperipteral temple in Parian marble, the structure of the temple re-emerged after the 1964 fire destroyed the central nave of the Baroque church that incorporated it, it's been since restored and reopened.
Armenia
Garni Temple
Croatia
Temple of Augustus, Pula, Croatia, largely complete (illustrated above); a large wall from another temple forms part of the town hall next door.
Temple of Jupiter in Diocletian's Palace, Split, Croatia. Small but very complete, amid other Roman buildings, c. 300. Most unusually, the barrel ceiling is intact.
France
Temple of Augustus and Livia, Vienne, France, exterior largely complete
Roman temple of Château-Bas, a Roman ruin located in Vernègues, France
Maison carrée, Nîmes, Southern France, one of the most complete survivals
Jordan
Temple of Artemis, Jerash, Jordan; partial remains of two other temples
Lebanon
Temple of Bacchus, Baalbek, Lebanon, very largely preserved, including the interior.
Temple of Jupiter, also in Baalbek
Portugal
Roman Temple of Évora, Évora, Portugal, impressive partial remains of a small temple
Tunisia
Sbeitla, Tunisia, three small temples in a row on the forum, many other city ruins.
Dougga, Tunisia, several temples in extensive city ruins, two with substantial remains.
Ruins, fragments, bases and excavations
Britain
Temple of Claudius, Colchester; some of the base can be seen in the basements of Colchester Castle, which was built over it.
Pagans Hill Roman Temple, Somerset, England, Romano-Celtic circular (octagonal) temple, the foundations excavated
Maiden Castle, Dorset, England
Roman Baths (Bath) and Temple of Sulis Minerva, Bath, Somerset, England
London Mithraeum, Londinium; the reassembled foundations can be seen from the street at Temple Court, Queen Victoria Street, London EC4.
Italy
Rome
Temple of Apollo Palatinus – Palatine Hill
Temple of Apollo Sosianus – Near the Theater of Marcellus
Temple of Bellona (Rome) – Near the Theater of Marcellus
Temple of Bona Dea – Aventine Hill
Largo di Torre Argentina – remains of four small temples of the Republic can be seen
Temple of Caesar – Roman Forum
Temple of Ceres, Liber and Libera – Aventine Hill
Temple of Castor and Pollux - In the Roman Forum
Temple of Claudius – Aventine Hill
Temple of Concord – Roman Forum at the base of the Capitoline
Temple of Cybele (Magna Mater) – Palatine Hill
Temple of Diana – Aventine Hill
Temple of Divus Augustus behind Basilica Julia
Temple of Elgabal – Palatine Hill
Temple of Flora - Aventine Hill
Temple of Fortuna Equestris - Campus Martius
Temple of Fortuna Respiciens - Palatine Hill
Temple of the gens Flavia - Quirinal Hill
Temple of Hercules Custos - Campus Martius
Temple of Hercules Musarum - Campus Martius
Temple of Isis and Serapis – Campus Martius
Temple of Janus (Roman Forum)
Temple of Janus (Forum Holitorium)
Temple of Juno Moneta – Capitoline Hill
Temple of Juno Regina - Campus Martius
Temple of Juno Regina (Aventine) – Aventine Hill
Temple of Juno Sospita (Palatine) - Palatine Hill
Temple of Jupiter (Capitoline Hill) – Capitoline Hill (under Palazzo Conservatori)
Temple of Jupiter Invictus – Palatine Hill
Temple of Jupiter Stator (3rd century BC) – in front of the gate of the Palatine Hill
Temple of Jupiter Stator (2nd century BC) – in the southern Campus Martius
Temple of Jupiter Tonans – Palatine Hill
Temple of Luna - Aventine Hill
Temple of Marcus Aurelius - Campus Martius
Temple of Mars - Campus Martius
Temple of Mars Ultor – Forum of Augustus
Temple of Matidia - Campus Martius
Temple of Mercury - Aventine Hill
Temple of Minerva Chalcidica - Campus Martius
Temple of Minerva Medica, named in literary sources but no longer extant
Temple of Minerva (Aventine) - Aventine Hill
Temple of Minerva (Forum of Nerva)- Forum of Nerva
Temple of Neptune - in the southern Campus Martius
Temple of the Nymphs - Campus Martius
Temple of Peace – Forum of Peace (now mostly covered by Via dei Fori Imperiali)
Temple of Serapis - Quirinal Hill
Temple of Siriaco – Janiculum Hill
Temple of the Sun - Campus Martius
Temple of Trajan –
Temple of Venus and Roma – Northeast corner of the Roman Forum
Temple of Venus Genetrix – Forum of Caesar
Temple of Vespasian and Titus, three columns still stand in the Roman Forum, with other fragments elsewhere
Temple of Veiovis – Capitoline Hill (Basement of Palazzo Senatorio)
Temple of Vulcan - Campus Martius
Lebanon
The 30 or so Temples of Mount Hermon are a group of small temples and shrines, some with substantial remains. Some are in modern Syria and Israel.
Temples of the Beqaa Valley, including Baalbek (see above).
Aaiha
Aaqbe
Afka
Ain Aata
Ain Harcha, good remains on a ridge-top outside town
Antoura
Bakka, Lebanon
Roman temple of Bziza
Dakoue
Deir El Aachayer
Edde
Hebbariye
Hosn Niha
Kafr Zebad
Kalaa
Kfar Qouq
Khirbet El-Knese
Labweh
Libbaya
Makam Er-Rab
Mejdal Anjar
Nebi Safa
Niha Bekaa, 4 small temples to local gods with partial remains, 1st century AD on.
Qal'at Bustra
Qasr el Banat
Saraain El Faouqa
Shheem
Yaat
Yanta
Sfire
Malta
Temple of Apollo in Melite (modern Mdina) – some ruins dismantled in the 18th century and stones reused in other buildings; part of podium still exists
Temple of Juno in Gaulos (modern Victoria, Gozo) – ruins dismantled in 1697–1711 during the construction of the Cathedral of the Assumption; some remains survive beneath the cathedral
Temple of Juno at Tas-Silġ, near Marsaxlokk – some foundations survive
Temple of Proserpina in Mtarfa – ruins dismantled in the 17th-18th centuries and stones reused in other buildings; an inscription, a fragment of a marble column and parts of a Punic cornice survive
Romania
Not much remains to be seen, but there were temples at Ulpia Traiana Sarmizegetusa (6), Alburnus Major (2), Apulum, Tibiscum Porolissum and probably Potaissa (suggested by five neighboring altars), as well as other sites.
Scotland
Arthur's O'on, Stenhousemuir, Scotland. Unusual stone "beehive"-shaped building, probably a temple, destroyed in 1743.
Slovenia
Temple of Hercules – Celje, Slovenia.
Gallo-Roman Temple – Celje, Slovenia - remains of Gallo-Roman Temple.
Spain
Roman temple of Alcántara, Spain, tiny but complete
Roman temple of Córdoba, Spain. Base and 11 Corinthian columns, found inside later buildings.
Roman temple of Vic, Spain. Substantially rebuilt, after it was found covered by a castle.
Temple of Augustus in Barcelona, Spain. Four large columns on base, found within a later building.
Temple of Diana, Mérida, Mérida, Spain.
Syria
Rakhleh, and other Temples of Mount Hermon
Burqush
Temple of Bel, Palmyra
Temple of Jupiter, Damascus, Syria
Temple of Zeus Hypsistos, Al-Dumayr
Funerary Temple, Palmyra
Temple of Bel-Shamin, Palmyra
Roman temple at Al-Mushannaf
Latakia Tetraporticus
Temple of Zeus Theos, Dura-Europos
Temple of Atargatis, Dura-Europos
Temple of the Gadde, Dura-Europos
Temple of Adonis, Dura-Europos
Temple of Artemis Azzanathkona, Dura -Europos
Temple of Zeus Kyrios, Dura-Europos
Temple of Zeus Megistos, Dura-Europos
Temple of Artemis Nanaia, Dura-Europos
Hosn Suleiman Temple
Bakhos Temple Latakia
Masmiyah-Phaena Temple
Temple of Bel, Dura-Europos
Temple of Augustus, Caesarea Philippi
Temple of Zeus, Caesarea Philippi
Upper Tomb Temple, Caesarea Philippi
Lower Tomb Temple, Caesarea Philippi
Horvat Omrit Temple (Augustus Temple)
Court of Pan, Caesarea Philippi
Atil, Roman temples
Sia Roman Temple, southern Syria
Athriya Roman Temple
Temple of Zeus Bomos, Baqirha
The remains of the 2nd-century Roman temple of Tyche in al-Sanamayn
Temple of Allat, Palmyra
Temple of Nabu, Palmyra
Temple of Baal-hamon, Palmyra
Roman Temple Kalybe (Bosra al-Sham)
Temple of the Tyche, Apamea
Roman Syria Temples (Modern Lebanon)- (Modern Israel/Golan Heights)
The 30 or so Temples of Mount Hermon are a group of small temples and shrines, some with substantial remains. Some are in modern Lebanon and Israel.
Roman Temple at Harran al-Awamid
Roman Temple in Qasr Chbib
Temple dedicated to sun god (Helios), As-Suwayda Qanawat (Kanawat)
Temple of Bacchus in present-day Latakia
Korsei el-Debb Roman temple
Temple of Rabbos, Al Quanawat
Temple to the sun god El Gabal, with the holy stone.
Temple of Zeus and Temple Cyrrhus
Tunisia
Djebel Zaghouan ("water temple" at the start of an aqueduct for Carthage)
Dougga (ruins of several temples)
Oudna
Pheradi Majus (Bouficha)
Segermes
Thuburbo Majus (ruins of several temples)
Turkey
Aphrodisias, remains of two temples, with unusually good reliefs in situ and in the local museum (the city had especially fine marble).
Temple of Augustus in Ancyra - Ankara, Turkey
Ephesus, remains of four temples, that of Hadrian the best, with a nymphaeum of Trajan.
Temple of Artemis
Temple of Trajan, Pergamon, part reconstructed. Remains of other temples.
Side, remains of three temples
Temple of Apollo
Donuktas Roman Temple - Tarsus [1]
Notes
References
"EERA" = Boëthius, Axel, Ling, Roger, Rasmussen, Tom, Etruscan and Early Roman Architecture, Yale/Pelican history of art, 1978, Yale University Press, ISBN 0300052901, 9780300052909, google books
Wheeler, Mortimer, Roman Art and Architecture, 1964, Thames and Hudson (World of Art), ISBN 0500200211