Canada
Many buildings and structures bear the name fort in Canada. Most of these places are either military installations, or a trading post that was established by a North American fur trading company.
Many buildings and structures bear the name fort in Canada. Most of these places are either military installations, or a trading post that was established by a North American fur trading company. A number of "forts" in northern and western Canada were also established as exploratory, or policing outposts.
A number of municipalities in Canada include the term fort in their names. The municipalities that use the term fort in their name do so for historical reasons, with many of these communities resulting from the outgrowth of migrants that settled around the original fort. Many of these municipalities continue to bear use the term fort in their names, regardless of whether or not the original fortification and/or trading post still stands.
Military fortifications
The majority of military fortifications in Canada were built by the British, French, and Canadian armed forces. However, several military fortifications were erected by the Hudson's Bay Company, whose royal charter required them to fortify Rupert's Land. Other groups that erected military fortifications in Canada includes First Nations, Spain, and the United States. Although military fortifications were built for strategic, and other military purposes, some military fortifications in Canada also housed trading posts, or was used by fur traders.
British Columbia
Manitoba
New Brunswick
Newfoundland and Labrador
Nova Scotia
Ontario
Prince Edward Island
Fort Amherst
Quebec
Exploratory forts
Several private entities, most notably the Hudson's Bay Company, established outposts or forts, within northern Canada for the purposes of housing exploratory expeditions to the Arctic. Forts that were built exclusively for the purposes of housing exploratory expeditions include:
Fur trading forts
A number of trading posts operated by fur trading companies were also referred to as forts. Fur trading companies that operated trading forts in Canada includes the Hudson's Bay Company, and the North West Company. Many of these were simply stockades, log enclosures for trading posts, although a few were former military installations which was later used by fur trading companies.
Alberta
British Columbia
Manitoba
Northwest Territories
Nunavut
Fort Ross
Ontario
Quebec
Saskatchewan
Yukon
Law enforcement forts
The North-West Mounted Police (later merged with the Dominion Police to form the Royal Canadian Mounted Police) established a number of policing outposts in western Canada during the mid to late 19th century, in an effort to provide law enforcement in the region. Forts established by the North-West Mounted Police includes: