Popular tourist attractions
Ajmer - Popular for Ajmer Sharif Dargah and Soniji Ki Nasiyan Jain Temple. Barmer - Barmer and surrounding areas offer a perfect picture of typical Rajasthani villages.
Ajmer - Popular for Ajmer Sharif Dargah and Soniji Ki Nasiyan Jain Temple.
Barmer - Barmer and surrounding areas offer a perfect picture of typical Rajasthani villages.
Bhilwara - Popular for its textile industry. Hamirgarh Eco-park and Harni Mahadev temple are important tourist destinations.
Bikaner - Famous for its havelis, palaces and the Karni Mata Temple in Deshnoke.
Chittorgarh - Popular for its monument and fort.
Bundi - Popular for its forts, palaces and stepwell reservoirs known as baoris.
Dausa - It is popular for Chand Baori and Mehandipur Balaji Temple.
Jaipur - Also known as Pink City of India and the capital of Rajasthan.
Jaisalmer - Famous for its golden fortress, havelis and some of the oldest Jain temples and libraries.
Jhalawar district - Caves like Binnayaga Buddhist Caves, Hathiagor Buddhist Caves, Kolvi Caves are popular medieval architecture of India.
Jhunjhunu district - Famous for Khetri Mahal, Rani Sati Temple, Alsisar Mahal, Badalgarh Fort, Tibrewala and Modi Haveli, Bissau Fort, Surajgarh Fort, Shyamgarh Fort, Bishangarh Fort, Mandawa Fort, Havelis in Nawalgarh, Fort of Mukundgarh.
Jodhpur - Famous for its architecture, blue homes give the name "Blue City" and Mehrangarh fort.
Kota - Well known for its gardens, palaces, and Chambal river safari.
Mount Abu - A hill station with 11th century Dilwara Jain Temples. The highest peak in the Aravalli Range of Rajasthan, Guru Shikhar is just 15 km from the main town. Mount Abu is also a good attraction place for adventure lover . There are many kinds of adventure activities like trekking, caving, Rock climbing, Rappelling etc.
Nathdwara - This town near Udaipur hosts the temple of Shrinathji.
Neemrana - home to the Neemrana Fort.
Pushkar - It has the first and one of the very few Brahma temples in the world, and also his wife Savitri Devi's temple, built on a hilltop. The Pushkar lake is considered sacred for Hindus.
Ranakpur - Large complex Jain Temple with about 1444 pillars and exquisite marble carvings.
Ranthambore - Situated near Sawai Madhopur. This town has historic Ranthambore Fort and one of the largest national park of India (Ranthambore National Park).
Sariska Tiger Reserve - Situated in the Alwar district.
Shekhawati - Located are small towns such as Mandawa and Ramgarh with frescoed havelis between 100 years to 300 years old, and Vedic period Dhosi Hill.
Udaipur - Also known as the "Venice of India".
Mandawa -The town of Mandawa was a thikana of Jaipur State. Mandawa once functioned as a trading outpost for ancient caravan routes in Shekhawati for goods from China and the Middle East. Thakur Nawal Singh, then ruler of Nawalgarh and Mandawa built a fort in to protect this outpost. Over time, a township grew around the fort and soon attracted a large community of traders, who then settled down at Mandawa. The great Ghazal Singer of South Asia, Mehdi Hassan was born here and migrated to Pakistan after the partition of India.