Influence
In architecture
The Alhambra was often remembered nostalgically in some Muslim societies after the Christian conquest of 1492 and may have influenced later examples of Islamic architecture. For example, several monuments constructed by the Saadian dynasty, which ruled Morocco in the 16th and 17th centuries, appear to imitate prototypes found in the Alhambra, particularly the Court of the Lions.
In architecture
The Alhambra was often remembered nostalgically in some Muslim societies after the Christian conquest of 1492 and may have influenced later examples of Islamic architecture. For example, several monuments constructed by the Saadian dynasty, which ruled Morocco in the 16th and 17th centuries, appear to imitate prototypes found in the Alhambra, particularly the Court of the Lions.
Its architecture was also a model emulated in the "Moresque" architectural style, a historicist style that became fashionable in Europe in the 19th century, with the publications of Owen Jones being particularly important in establishing this influence. After Owen Jones published Plans, Elevations, Sections and Details of the Alhambra in London from 1842 to 1845, a fanciful, ornamental, Alhambra-inspired Orientalist architectural style called Alhambresque became popular in the West in the 19th century.
The Alhambresque style was later absorbed in the Ottoman world, in what Ussama Makdisi called "Ottoman Orientalism." Early use of Alhambresque motifs (such as sebka) is evident in buildings from the reign of Sultan Abdülaziz (r. 1861–1876) in Istanbul, such as the monumental gate on Beyazıt Square (c. 1865), now the entrance of Istanbul University. The mausoleum of Fuad Pasha (1869–70), who personally visited the Alhambra as Ottoman ambassador in 1844, is almost entirely in a "Moresque" style. The style was also employed in the Gezira Palace in Cairo, built to host royal guests for the 1869 opening of the Suez Canal. Khedive Isma'il even commissioned Owen Jones to design the interiors of this palace.
The Alhambra also inspired a number of buildings in Moorish Revival architecture:
Isaac M. Wise Temple (synagogue in Cincinnati, Ohio)
Villa Zorayda (villa in St. Augustine, Florida)
Villa Alhambra (villa in Malta)
In mathematics
The Alhambra tiles are remarkable in that they contain nearly all, if not all, of the seventeen mathematically possible wallpaper groups. This is a unique accomplishment in world architecture. M. C. Escher's visit in 1922 and study of the Moorish use of symmetries in the Alhambra tiles inspired his subsequent work on tessellation, which he called "regular divisions of the plane".