Building types
Mosques
Historically, there was a distinction between regular mosques and Friday mosques, which were larger and had a more important status by virtue of being the venue where the khutba (sermon) was delivered on Fridays. In the early Islamic era there was typically only one Friday mosque per city, but over time Friday mosques multiplied until it was common practice to have one in every neighbourhood or district of the city.
Mosques
Historically, there was a distinction between regular mosques and Friday mosques, which were larger and had a more important status by virtue of being the venue where the khutba (sermon) was delivered on Fridays. In the early Islamic era there was typically only one Friday mosque per city, but over time Friday mosques multiplied until it was common practice to have one in every neighbourhood or district of the city. Mosques could also frequently be accompanied by other facilities which served the community.
Most mosques in the region have roughly rectangular floor plans and follow the hypostyle format: they consist of a large prayer hall divided into naves or aisles by rows of horseshoe arches that run either parallel or perpendicular to the qibla wall (the wall towards which prayers faced). The qibla (direction of prayer) is symbolized by a decorative niche or alcove in the qibla wall, known as a mihrab. Next to the mihrab there is usually a symbolic pulpit known as a minbar, usually in the form of a staircase leading to a small kiosk or platform, where the imam would stand to deliver the khutba. The mosque also normally includes a sahn (courtyard) which often has a fountain or water basin to assist with ablutions. In early periods this courtyard could be relatively minor in proportion to the rest of the mosque, but in later periods (in Morocco at least) it became progressively larger until it was equal in size to the prayer hall and sometimes larger.
Hypostyle mosques also frequently follow the "T-type" model, in which the nave between the arches running towards the mihrab (perpendicular to the qibla wall) was wider than the others, as was also the aisle directly in front of and along the qibla wall (running parallel to it), thus forming a T-shaped space in the floor plan of the mosque. This part of the plan was often accentuated by greater decoration, such as more elaborate arch shapes or decorative cupola ceilings at each end of the "T").
From afar, mosque buildings are distinguished by their minaret towers. Minarets traditionally have a square shaft and are arranged in two tiers: the main shaft, which makes up most of its height, and a much smaller secondary tower above this which is in turn topped by a finial of copper or brass spheres. Some minarets in North Africa have octagonal shafts, though this is more characteristic of certain regions or periods. Inside the main shaft a staircase, and in other cases a ramp, ascends to the top.
The floor plan of a mosque is also aligned with the direction of prayer, sometimes even at odds with the orientation of the streets around it. Today it is standard practice that the direction of prayer is the line marking the shortest distance between oneself and the Kaaba in Mecca. In the western Mediterranean, this corresponds to a generally eastern orientation (varying slightly depending on your exact position). However, in early Islamic periods there were other interpretations of what the qibla should be. In the western Islamic world in particular, early mosques often had a southern orientation, as can be seen in major monuments like the Great Mosque of Cordoba and the Qarawiyyin Mosque in Fes. This was based on a reported hadith of the Islamic prophet Muhammad which stated that "what is between the east and west is a qibla", as well as on a popular view that mosques should follow the cardinal alignment of the Kaaba itself, whose axes are aligned according to certain astronomical references (e.g. its minor axis is aligned with the sunrise of the summer solstice).
Synagogues
Synagogues had a very different layout from mosques but in North Africa and Al-Andalus they often shared similar decorative trends as the traditional Islamic architecture around them, such as colourful tilework and carved stucco, though later synagogues in North Africa were built in other styles too. Notable examples of historic synagogues in Spain include the Synagogue of Santa Maria la Blanca in Toledo (rebuilt in its current form in 1250), the Synagogue of Cordoba (1315), and the Synagogue of El Tránsito in Toledo (1355–1357). In Morocco they include the Ibn Danan Synagogue in Fes, the Slat al-Azama Synagogue in Marrakesh, and the Beth-El Synagogue in Casablanca, though numerous other examples exist. One of the most famous historic synagogues in Tunisia is the 19th-century El Ghriba synagogue.
Madrasas
The madrasa was an institution which originated in northeastern Iran by the early 11th century and was progressively adopted further west. It provided higher education and served to train Islamic scholars, particularly in Islamic law and jurisprudence (fiqh), most commonly in the Maliki branch of Sunni legal thought. The madrasa of the Sunni world was generally antithetical to more heterodox religious doctrines, including the doctrine espoused by the Almohads. As such, in the westernmost parts of the Islamic world it only came to flourish in the late 13th century, under the Marinid, Zayyanid, and Hafsid dynasties that succeeded the Almohads.
In other parts of the Muslim world, the founders of madrasas could name themselves or their family members as administrators of the foundation's waqf (a charitable and inalienable endowment), making them a convenient means of protecting family fortunes, but this was not allowed under the Maliki school of law that was dominant in the western Islamic lands. As a result, the construction of madrasas was less prolific in the Maghreb and al-Andalus than it was further east. Madrasas in this region are also frequently named after their location or some other distinctive physical feature, rather than after their founders (as was common further east).
Madrasas were generally centered around a main courtyard with a central fountain, off which other rooms could be accessed. Student living quarters were typically distributed on an upper floor around the courtyard. Many madrasas also included a prayer hall with a mihrab, though only the Bou Inania Madrasa of Fes officially functioned as a full mosque and featured its own minaret.
Mausoleums and zawiyas
Most Muslim graves are traditionally simple and unadorned, but in North Africa the graves of important figures were often covered in a domed structure (or a cupola of often pyramidal shape) called a qubba (also spelled koubba). This was especially characteristic for the tombs of "saints" such as walis and marabouts: individuals who came to be venerated for their strong piety, reputed miracles, or other mystical attributes. Many of these existed within the wider category of Islamic mysticism known as Sufism. Some of these tombs became the focus of entire religious complexes built around them, known as a zawiya (also spelled zaouia; Arabic: زاوية). They typically included a mosque, school, and other charitable facilities. Such religious establishments were major centers of Sufism across the region and grew in power and influence over the centuries, often associated with specific Sufi Brotherhoods or schools of thought.
Funduqs (merchant inns)
A funduq (also spelled foundouk or fondouk; Arabic: فندق) was a caravanserai or commercial building which served as both an inn for merchants and a warehouse for their goods and merchandise. In North Africa some funduqs also housed the workshops of local artisans. As a result of this function, they also became centers for other commercial activities such as auctions and markets. They typically consisted of a large central courtyard surrounded by a gallery, around which storage rooms and sleeping quarters were arranged, frequently over multiple floors. Some were relatively simple and plain, while others, like the Funduq al-Najjarin in Fes, were quite richly decorated. While many structures of this kind can be found in historic North African cities, the only one in Al-Andalus to have been preserved is the Nasrid-era Corral del Carbón in Granada.
Hammams (bathhouses)
Hammams (Arabic: حمّام) are public bathhouses which were ubiquitous in Muslim cities. Essentially derived from the Roman bathhouse model, hammams normally consisted of four main chambers: a changing room, from which one then moved on to a cold room, a warm room, and a hot room. Heat and steam were generated by a hypocaust system which heated the floors. The furnace re-used natural organic materials (such as wood shavings, olive pits, or other organic waste byproducts) by burning them for fuel. The smoke generated by this furnace helped with heating the floors while excess smoke was evacuated through chimneys. Of the different rooms, only the changing room was heavily decorated with zellij, stucco, or carved wood. The cold, warm, and hot rooms were usually vaulted or domed chambers without windows, designed to keep steam from escaping, but partially lit thanks to small holes in the ceiling which could be covered by ceramic or coloured glass. Many historic hammams have been preserved in cities like Marrakesh and Fez in Morocco, partly thanks to their continued use by locals up to the present day. In Al-Andalus, by contrast, they fell out of use after the expulsion of Muslims from the Iberian Peninsula and are only preserved as archeological sites or historic monuments.
Palaces
The main palaces of rulers were usually located inside a separate fortified district or citadel of the capital city. These citadels included a complex of different structures including administrative offices, official venues for ceremonies and receptions, functional amenities (such as warehouses, kitchens, and hammams), and the private residences of the ruler and his family. Although palace architecture varied from one period and region to the next, certain traits recurred such as the predominance of courtyards and internal gardens around which elements of the palace were typically centered.
In some cases, rulers were installed in the existing fortified citadel of the city, such as the many Alcazabas and Alcázars in Spain, or the Kasbahs of North Africa. The original Alcazar of Cordoba, used by the Umayyad emirs and their predecessors, was an early example of this. When Cordoba first became the capital of Al-Andalus in the 8th century the early Muslim governors simply moved into the former Visigothic palace, which was eventually redeveloped and modified by the Umayyad rulers after them. The Alcázar of Seville was also occupied and rebuilt in different periods by different rulers. In Marrakesh, Morocco, the Almohad Caliphs in the late 12th century built a large new palace district, the Kasbah, on the south side of the city, which was subsequently occupied and rebuilt by the later Saadian and 'Alawi dynasties. In Al-Andalus many palace enclosures were highly fortified alcazabas located on hilltops overlooking the rest of the city, such as the Alcazaba of Almería and the Alcazaba of Málaga, which were occupied by the various governors and local rulers. The most famous of all these, however, is the Alhambra of Granada, which was built up by the Nasrid dynasty during the 13th to 15th centuries.
Rulers with enough resources sometimes founded entirely separate and autonomous royal cities outside their capital cities, such as Madinat al-Zahra, built by Abd ar-Rahman III outside Cordoba, or Fes el-Jdid built by the Marinids outside old Fez. Some rulers even built entirely new capital cities centered on their palaces, such as the Qal'at Bani Hammad, founded in 1007 by the Hammadids in present-day Algeria, and Mahdia, begun in 916 by the Fatimid Caliphs in present-day Tunisia. In many periods and regions rulers also built outlying private estates with gardens in the countryside. As early as the 8th century, for example, Abd ar-Rahman I possessed such estates in the countryside outside Cordoba. The later Nasrid-built Generalife, located on the mountainside a short distance outside the Alhambra, is also an example of outlying residence and garden made for the private use of the rulers. Moroccan sultans also built pleasure pavilions or residences within the vast gardens and orchards that they maintained outside their cities, notably the Menara Gardens and Agdal Gardens on the outskirts of Marrakesh.
Fortifications
In Al-Andalus
The remains of castles and fortifications from various periods of Al-Andalus have survived across Spain and Portugal, often situated on hilltops and elevated positions that command the surrounding countryside. A large number of Arabic terms were used to denote different types and functions, many of which were borrowed into Spanish and are found in present-day toponyms, such as Alcazaba (from Arabic: القَـصَـبَـة, romanized: al-qaṣabah), meaning a fortified enclosure or citadel where the governor or ruler was typically installed, and Alcázar (from Arabic: القصر, romanized: al-qaṣr), which was typically a palace protected by fortifications. Fortifications were built either in stone or in rammed earth. Stone was used more commonly in the Umayyad period (8th–10th centuries) while rammed earth became more common in subsequent periods and was also more common in the south.
In the Umayyad period (8th–10th centuries) an extensive network of border fortifications stretched in a wide line roughly from Lisbon in the west then up through the Central System of mountains in Spain, around the region of Madrid, and up to the region of Navarre and Huesca in the northeast. Castles and fortified garrisons existed in the interior of the realm as well. Many of these early fortifications had relatively simple designs with no barbicans and only a single line of walls. The gates were typically straight entrances with an inner and outer doorway on the same axis. Castles typically had quadrangular layouts with walls reinforced by rectangular towers. The authorities also built multitudes of small, usually round, watch towers which could rapidly send messages to each other via fire or smoke signals.
Following the collapse of the Caliphate in the 11th century, the resulting political insecurity encouraged further fortification of cities. Military architecture also became steadily more complex. Fortified gates began to regularly include bent entrances. Military technology grew still more sophisticated during the Almohad period (12th and early 13th centuries), with barbicans appearing in front of city walls and albarrana towers appearing as a recurring innovation. Fortification towers also became taller and more massive, sometimes with round or polygonal bases but more commonly still rectangular. Some of the more famous tower fortifications from this period include the Calahorra Tower in Cordoba and the Torre del Oro in Seville. The latter is a dodecagonal tower which fortified a corner of the city walls and which, along with another tower across the river, protected the city's harbour.
In the final period from the 13th to 15th centuries, fortresses and towns were again refortified. In addition to the fortifications of Granada and its Alhambra, the Nasrids built or rebuilt the Gibralfaro Castle of Málaga and the castle of Antequera, and many smaller strategic hilltop forts like that of Tabernas. This late period saw the construction of massive towers and keeps which likely reflected a growing influence of Christian military architecture.
In the Maghreb
Some of the oldest surviving Islamic-era monuments in the Maghreb are military structures in present-day Tunisia. The best-known examples are the Ribat of Sousse and the Ribat of Monastir, both dating generally from the Aghlabid period in the 9th century. A ribat was a type of residential fortress which was built to guard the early frontiers of Muslim territory in North Africa. They were built at intervals along the coastline so that they could signal each other from afar. Also dating from the same period are the city walls of Sousse and Sfax, both made in stone and bearing similarities to earlier Byzantine-Roman walls in Africa.
Several ruling dynasties in the region built fortified capitals or citadels. The Fatimids built a heavily fortified new capital at Mahdia in present-day Tunisia, located on a narrow peninsula extending from the coastline into the sea and surrounded by walls and a single land gate. The Hammadids also built a new fortified capital in present-day Algeria known as Qal'at Bani Hammad in the 11th century, located on a strategic elevated site. Along with the earlier Zirid fortifications of Bijaya and 'Ashir, its walls were made mainly of rough stone or rubble stone, demonstrating a slow shift in construction methods away from earlier Byzantine-Roman methods and towards more characteristically North African and Berber architecture. The later Marinids fortified their palace-city of Fes el-Jdid, built in the late 13th century, with a line of double walls.
Starting with the Almoravid and Almohad domination of the 11th–13th centuries, most medieval fortifications in the western Maghreb shared many characteristics with those of Al-Andalus. City walls in Morocco were generally built out of rammed earth, reinforced at regular intervals by square towers, as exemplified by the walls of Marrakesh, the walls of Fes, and the walls of Rabat. In western Algeria, the walls of Tlemcen (formerly Tagrart) were likewise partly built by the Almoravids with a mix of rubble stone at the base and rammed earth above. As elsewhere, the gates were often the weakest points of a defensive wall and so were usually more heavily fortified than the surrounding wall. In Morocco, gates were often designed with a bent entrance.
In later centuries, Moroccan rulers continued to build traditional walls and fortifications while at the same time borrowing elements from European military architecture in the new gunpowder age, most likely through their encounters with the Portuguese and other European powers at this time. The Saadian bastions of Fes, such as Borj Nord, are one early example of these architectural innovations.
"Kasbah", or tighremt in Amazigh, can also refer to various fortresses or fortified mansions in the Atlas Mountains and the desert oases regions of Morocco. In these regions, often traditionally Amazigh (Berber) areas, kasbahs are again made of rammed earth and mud-brick (or sometimes stone), often marked by square corner towers and decorated with simple geometric motifs. Communal fortified granaries are another feature of local Berber architecture in southern Morocco, Algeria, and southern Tunisia, with styles and layouts differing from region to region.