Related media
Many guests featured on Ancient Aliens appear in other History channel series and specials, such as The Secret of Skinwalker Ranch, America's Book of Secrets, and The Curse of Oak Island. Segments from those series have appeared in Ancient Aliens.
Many guests featured on Ancient Aliens appear in other History channel series and specials, such as The Secret of Skinwalker Ranch, America's Book of Secrets, and The Curse of Oak Island. Segments from those series have appeared in Ancient Aliens. William Shatner, who appears in two episodes of Ancient Aliens, presents The UnXplained which explores many of the topics featured in episodes Ancient Aliens. Shatner narrated the English-language version of Mystery of the Gods (1976) which was based on von Däniken's books published after Chariots of the Gods?.
Ancient Aliens meme
Tsoukalos's appearances in Ancient Aliens inspired a meme highlighting his unusual hairstyle overlaid with the caption: "I'm not saying it was aliens ... but ..." Variations of the meme were uploaded by users as early as November 2010. According to Dictionary.com, the meme mimicked "the tone of conviction used by Tsoukalos to present unfounded far-fetched pseudo-logic as fact."
Alien Con
From 2016 to 2018, A&E Networks co-produced a number of multi-day events branded as "Alien Con". Some events were organized as symposia, and others were organized as residential conventions similar to Worldcon. Guests from the series hosted several panels, in addition to offering book signings and photos. Footage from the conventions hosted in 2016 and 2017 appeared in several episodes in Seasons 11, 12 and 13. Highlights from the 2018 Baltimore Alien Con were featured during the Season 14 episode "Project Hybrid".
Action Bronson Watches Ancient Aliens
In April 2016, Vice on TV released Action Bronson Watches Ancient Aliens, which was followed by a ten-episode series, later retitled Traveling the Stars. Each episode features rapper Action Bronson and celebrity guests watching episodes of Ancient Aliens while intoxicated by cannabis. The series is presented in a comedy-documentary format which parodies Ancient Aliens's presentation style.
Bronson praised Ancient Aliens, saying it is "the best thing that was ever created by man." According to producers Jordan Kinley and Hannah Gregg, Traveling the Stars was developed as a response to complaints by disgruntled viewers of H2 which Vice on TV's programming replaced. Traveling the Stars was renewed for a second season in 2019.
Illustrated companion and game
A companion to the series, Ancient Aliens: The Official Companion Book (ISBN 978-0-06-245541-3) was published in November 2016. Included was an overview of the ancient astronaut hypothesis, and introductions to a number of topics explored by the television series up to Season 11. The audiobook adaptation, which is no longer available, featured the voices of Giorgio A. Tsoukalos, Angela Cartwright, Bill Mumy, Robert Clotworthy, and producer Kevin Burns.
Ancient Aliens: The Game is a city-building game developed by Fifth Column Games. The user plays as an alien-human hybrid who must oversee the construction of the Great Pyramid of Giza. The game was released in 2016 as a free-to-play mobile and Facebook game. A PC port was released by Legacy Games in September 2022.
Film adaptation
In April 2021, Counterbalance Entertainment announced they had closed a deal with Legendary Entertainment to produce a film adaptation of Ancient Aliens. Josh Heald, creator of Cobra Kai, will direct a script written by Luke Ryan who will also executive produce. In July 2022, Legendary announced Craig Titley would write the feature script with Josh Heald to direct in partnership with Counterbalance Entertainment.