Television and media
Beginning in the 1990s, Hancock also fronted television documentaries that promoted his pseudoarchaeological claims. He appeared in The Mysterious Origins of Man (1996), wrote and presented Underworld: Flooded Kingdoms of the Ice Age (2002), and hosted Quest for the Lost Civilization (1998).
Beginning in the 1990s, Hancock also fronted television documentaries that promoted his pseudoarchaeological claims. He appeared in The Mysterious Origins of Man (1996), wrote and presented Underworld: Flooded Kingdoms of the Ice Age (2002), and hosted Quest for the Lost Civilization (1998). In 2022 he presented Ancient Apocalypse, a widely viewed Netflix documentary series that critics and archaeologists condemned as pseudoscience.
Ancient Apocalypse & The Americas (2022-2024)
Hancock's theories are the basis of Ancient Apocalypse, a 2022 documentary series produced by Netflix, where Hancock's son Sean is "senior manager of unscripted originals". In the series, Hancock outlines his long-held belief that there was an advanced civilization during the last ice age, that it was destroyed following comet impacts around 12,000 years ago, and that its survivors introduced agriculture, monumental architecture, and astronomy to hunter-gatherers around the world. He attempts to show how several ancient monuments and natural features are evidence of this, and he repeatedly claims that archaeologists are ignoring or covering up this alleged evidence.
Archaeologists and other experts say that the series presents pseudoscientific claims that lack evidence, cherry picks, and fails to present counter-evidence. Other commentators criticized the series for unfounded accusations that "mainstream archaeology" conspires against Hancock's ideas. Archaeologists linked Hancock's claims to "white supremacist" ideologies from the 19th century, which they say are insulting to the ancestors of indigenous peoples who built the monuments. A Maltese archaeologist who appeared in an episode said her interview had been manipulated. The Society for American Archaeology (SAA) objected to the classification of the series as a documentary and asked Netflix to relabel it as science fiction. The SAA argued that the show vilifies archaeologists with aggressive rhetoric, draws on theories associated with racist white supremacist ideologies, harms Indigenous peoples, emboldens extremists, and offers no archaeological evidence for an "advanced, global Ice Age civilization".
Netflix released a second season titled "Ancient Apocalypse, The Americas" in October 2024. Keanu Reeves joined the cast and adventure. The season focused on sites and topics across North and South America, including White Sands fossil footprints in New Mexico, large scale geoglyphs in the western Amazon, Rapa Nui, Andean centers such as Sacsayhuaman, and monumental sites in Mesoamerica including Palenque and Chichen Itza. The narrative repeated Hancock's claim that a sophisticated ice age culture transmitted astronomy and engineering knowledge to later populations after a cataclysm, and proposed cross cultural linkages among myths and iconography.
In July 2024, before release, producers dropped planned filming in the United States after objections by Indigenous groups to Hancock's portrayal of Native histories. The Guardian reported documented permit issues at Grand Canyon and Chaco Canyon and the subsequent relocation of production to other countries.
Season 2 content drew detailed rebuttals from academic specialists and science writers. Johnny Loftus wrote in Decider, "Ancient Apocalypse: The Americas is only interested in using legitimate scientific research as cheap fodder for the grandiose, unproven theories of one guy, who also seems convinced that every single archaeologist ever has been out to get him." He added that "Graham Hancock loves a sweeping turn of phrase like 'the fog of amnesia about our ancient past.' But what he loves more is to give voice to what feels like a lasting personal vendetta against entire fields of professional science." Critics argued that the White Sands trackways do not support a narrative of technological civilizers, that Amazonian geoglyphs and terra preta reflect regional developments rather than imported ice age knowledge, and that proposed long range iconographic links are subjective comparisons without testable mechanisms.
Other media appearances
Hancock gave a TEDx lecture titled "The War on Consciousness", in which he described his use of ayahuasca, an Amazonian brew containing a hallucinogenic compound DMT, and argued that adults should be allowed to responsibly use it for self-improvement and spiritual growth. He stated that for 24 years he was "pretty much permanently stoned" on cannabis, and that in 2011, six years after his first use of ayahuasca, it enabled him to stop using cannabis. At the recommendation of TED's Science Board, the lecture was removed from the TEDx YouTube channel and moved to TED's main website where it "can be framed to highlight both [Hancock's] provocative ideas and the factual problems with [his] arguments".
Hancock has appeared on The Joe Rogan Experience podcast several times. In April 2024 (episode #2136) Hancock debated Flint Dibble, a professor of archeology at Cardiff University, who strongly rebutted Hancock's unfounded ideas, leading even many of Hancock's backers "to see Dibble - and orthodox science - as the victor." Both Hancock and Dibble agreed that continuing archeological research would be a great benefit to humanity.