California Historical Landmark
A California Historical Landmark (CHL) is a building, structure, site, or place in the U.S. state of California that has been determined to have statewide historical landmark significance.
A California Historical Landmark (CHL) is a building, structure, site, or place in the U.S. state of California that has been determined to have statewide historical landmark significance.
Criteria
Historical significance is determined by meeting at least one of these criteria:
The first, last, only, or most significant of its type in the state or within a large geographic region (Northern, Central, or Southern California);
Associated with an individual or group having a profound influence on the history of California; or
An outstanding example of a period, style, architectural movement or construction; or is the best surviving work in a region of a pioneer architect, designer, or master builder.
Other designations
California Historical Landmarks numbered 770 and higher are automatically listed in the California Register of Historical Resources.
A site, building, feature, or event that is of local (city or county) significance may be designated as a California Point of Historical Interest.
Gallery
See also
List of California Historical Landmarks by county
Federal historical landmarks
National Historic Sites (United States)
National Register of Historic Places listings in California
Local historical landmarks
Bakersfield Register of Historic Places and Areas of Historic Interest
Berkeley Landmarks in Berkeley, California
Glendale Register of Historic Resources and Historic Districts
Long Beach historic landmarks
Los Angeles Historic-Cultural Monuments
Oakland Designated Landmarks
San Diego Historic Landmarks
San Francisco Designated Landmarks
San Luis Obispo Historic Resources
Santa Barbara Historic Landmarks
Santa Monica Designated Historic Landmarks
City of Ventura Historic Landmarks and Districts
Ventura County Historic Landmarks & Points of Interest
References
Johnson, Marael (1995). Why Stop? A Guide to California Roadside Historical Markers. Houston, TX: Gulf Publishing Company. p. 213. ISBN 9780884159230. OCLC 32168093.
External links
Official OHP—California Office of Historic Preservation website
OHP: California Historical Sites searchpage — links to lists by county