List of San Diego Historical Landmarks in La Jolla
In 1967, the City of San Diego, California, established a Historical Resources Board with the authority to designate and protect the city's landmark buildings and structures. In total, the city has designated more than 1500 structures or other properties as historical landmarks.
The Historical Landmarks listed here are located in the La Jolla and Torrey Pines areas. Four of the properties have also received recognition at the federal level by inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places and one—the George H. Scripps Memorial Marine Biological Laboratory—by designation as a National Historic Landmark.
The sites designated as landmarks include numerous structures designed by early Modern architect Irving J. Gill. Also included is the Torrey Pines Area and several sites connected to La Jolla's long association with scientific research, including the George H. Scripps Memorial Marine Biological Laboratory and the Salk Institute for Biological Studies.
In 1967, the City of San Diego, California, established a Historical Resources Board with the authority to designate and protect the city's landmark buildings and structures. In total, the city has designated more than 1500 structures or other properties as historical landmarks.
The Historical Landmarks listed here are located in the La Jolla and Torrey Pines areas. Four of the properties have also received recognition at the federal level by inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places and one—the George H. Scripps Memorial Marine Biological Laboratory—by designation as a National Historic Landmark.
The sites designated as landmarks include numerous structures designed by early Modern architect Irving J. Gill. Also included is the Torrey Pines Area and several sites connected to La Jolla's long association with scientific research, including the George H. Scripps Memorial Marine Biological Laboratory and the Salk Institute for Biological Studies.
Listing
See also
National Register of Historic Places listings in San Diego County
List of San Diego Historic Landmarks in the Point Loma and Ocean Beach areas
List of San Diego Historic Landmarks (1-150)
References
External links
California Historical Resources Inventory Database - City of San Diego