Country by country look
United States
Heritage Preservation, in partnership with the Institute of Museum and Library Services, a U.S. federal agency, produced The Heritage Health Index.
United States
Heritage Preservation, in partnership with the Institute of Museum and Library Services, a U.S. federal agency, produced The Heritage Health Index. The results of this work was the report A Public Trust at Risk: The Heritage Health Index Report on the State of America's Collections, which was published in December 2005 and concluded that immediate action is needed to prevent the loss of 190 million artifacts that are in need of conservation treatment. The report made four recommendations:
Institutions must give priority to providing safe conditions for the collections they hold in trust.
Every collecting institution must develop an emergency plan to protect its collections and train staff to carry it out.
Every institution must assign responsibility for caring for collections to members of its staff.
Individuals at all levels of government and in the private sector must assume responsibility for providing the support that will allow these collections to survive.
United Kingdom
In October 2006, the Department for Culture, Media and Sport, a governmental department, authored a document: "Understanding the Future: Priorities for England's Museums". This document was based on several years of consultation aimed to lay out the government's priorities for museums in the 21st century.
The document listed the following as priorities for the next decade:
Museums will fulfil their potential as learning resources (pp 7–10).
Museums will be embedded into the delivery of education in every school in the country.
Understanding of the effectiveness of museum education will be improved further and best practice built into education programmes.
The value of museums' collections as a research resource will be well understood and better links built between the academic community and museums.
Museums will embrace their role in fostering, exploring, celebrating and questioning the identities of diverse communities (pp 11–14).
The sector needs to work with partners in academia and beyond to create an intellectual framework supporting museums' capacity to tackle issues of identity.
The museum sector must continue to develop improved practical techniques for engaging communities of all sorts.
Museums' collections will be more dynamic and better used (pp 15–18).
Government and the sector will find new ways to encourage museums to collect actively and strategically, especially the record of contemporary society.
The sector will develop new collaborative approaches to sharing and developing collections and related expertise.
Museums' workforce will be dynamic, highly skilled and representative (pp 17–22).
Museums' governing bodies and workforce will be representative of the communities they serve.
Find more varied ways for a broader range of skills to come into museums.
Improve continuing professional development.
Museums will work more closely with each other and partners outside the sector (pp 23–26).
A consistent evidence base of the contribution of all kinds of museums to the full range of public service agendas will be developed.
There will be deeper and longer lasting partnerships between the national museums and a broader range of regional partners.
Museums' international roles will be strengthened to improve museum programmes in this country and Britain's image, reputation and relationships abroad.
The conservation profession response to this report was on the whole less than favourable, the Institute of Conservation (ICON) published their response under the title "A Failure of Vision". It had the following to say:
No sector can look with confidence to the future if its key asset is worked harder and harder across an ever broadening range of objectives while the inputs required to sustain it are neglected.
It is of major concern to us that the only part of this section which makes any acknowledgement of the need for greater resourcing is the part which refers to acquisitions. The original consultation paper made quite extensive reference to the importance of collections, the role of new technologies, and cultural property issues, but this appears to have been whittled away in the present document.
Concluding: When asked by the Commons Culture Media and Sport elect Committee CMS committee what he would like to see as a priority in the DCMS document arising from the 'Understanding the Future' consultation, Mr MacGregor responded 'I would like to see added there the need to conserve and research the collections, so that the collections can really play the role across the whole of the United Kingdom that they should.'
So would we.
Further to this the ICON website summary report lists the following specific recommendations:
A national survey to find out what the public want from museums, what motivates them to visit them and what makes for a rewarding visit.
A review of survey results and prioritisation of the various intrinsic, instrumental and institutional values to provide a clear basis for a 10-year strategy
HR consultants to be brought in from the commercial sector to review recruitment, career development and working practices in the national and regional museums.
A commitment to examine the potential for using Museum Accreditation as a more effective driver for improving recruitment, diversity, and career development across the sector.
DCMS to take full account of the eventual findings of the current Commons Select Committee enquiry into Care of Collections in the final version of this document
The adoption of those recommendations of the recent House of Lords inquiry into Science and Heritage which might affect the future of museums.
In November 2008, the UK-based think tank Demos published an influential pamphlet entitled It's a material world: caring for the public realm, in which they argue for integrating the public directly into efforts to conserve material culture, particularly that which is in the public, their argument, as stated on page 16, demonstrates their belief that society can benefit from conservation as a paradigm as well as a profession:
conservators provide a paradigm not just for fixing things when they are broken, but for a wider social ethos of care, where we individually and collectively take responsibility and action.