Supporting organizations
The United Nations recognizes and supports cultural heritage around the world, in particular UNESCO in partnership with the International Organization of Folk Art (IOV). Their declared mission is to "further folk art, customs and culture around the world through the organization of festivals and other cultural events, ... with emphasis on dancing, folk music, folk songs and folk art." By supporting international exchanges of folk art groups as well as the organization of festivals and other cultural events, their goal is promote international understanding and world peace.
The United Nations recognizes and supports cultural heritage around the world, in particular UNESCO in partnership with the International Organization of Folk Art (IOV). Their declared mission is to "further folk art, customs and culture around the world through the organization of festivals and other cultural events, ... with emphasis on dancing, folk music, folk songs and folk art." By supporting international exchanges of folk art groups as well as the organization of festivals and other cultural events, their goal is promote international understanding and world peace.
In the United States, the National Endowment for the Arts works to promote greater understanding and sustainability of cultural heritage across the United States and around the world through research, education, and community engagement. As part of this, they identify and support NEA folk art fellows in quilting, ironwork, woodcarving, pottery, embroidery, basketry, weaving, along with other related traditional arts. The NEA guidelines define as criteria for this award a display of "authenticity, excellence, and significance within a particular tradition" for the artists selected. (NEA guidelines) .”
In 1966, the NEA's first year of funding, support for national and regional folk festivals was identified as a priority with the first grant made in 1967 to the National Folk Festival Association. Folklife festivals are celebrated around the world to encourage and support the education and community engagement of diverse ethnic communities.