Molas in Guna Culture
Several early influences can be attested: a small colony by Christopher Columbus in 1502, a Scottish colony established in the south of Darien, in 1698; the Calvinist or French Huguenots settled and married some Guna women, even though they were killed in 1757. Ultimately a Spanish colony was established in 1790.
Several early influences can be attested: a small colony by Christopher Columbus in 1502, a Scottish colony established in the south of Darien, in 1698; the Calvinist or French Huguenots settled and married some Guna women, even though they were killed in 1757. Ultimately a Spanish colony was established in 1790.
By 1907, the traditional costume of a Guna woman consists of a patterned blue cotton wrapped skirt, red and yellow headscarf, arm and leg beads, gold nose rings and earrings and the many layered and finely sewn mola panel blouse.
The artistry of a mola reflects a synthesis of traditional Guna culture with the influences of the modern world. Mola art developed when Guna women had access to store bought yard goods. Mola designs are often inspired by modern graphics such as political posters, labels, pictures from books and TV cartoons, as well as traditional themes from Guna legends and culture.
Geometric molas are the most traditional, having developed from ancient body painting designs. Many hours of careful sewing are required to create a fine mola. The ability to make an outstanding mola is a source of status among Guna women.
The quality of a mola is determined by such factors as the number of layers, fineness of the stitching, evenness and width of cutouts, addition of details such as zigzag borders, lattice-work or embroidery, color combination, and, as Mari Lyn Salvador put it, "skillful manipulation of the technical process and the amount of work involved, together with the design considerations which include filled space, repetition with subtle variation, subtle asymmetry, visibility, complexity, and interesting subject matter".
Since mola panels have been worn as part of the traditional blouse of a Guna woman, they often show signs of wear such as fading and stitch marks along the edges of the panels. These "imperfections" indicate that the mola is authentic and not made solely to be sold to tourists, albeit a strong production of molas for the sole purpose of a sale to outsiders started to flourish after the second World War.
Molas are very sturdy and well sewn. Authentic molas have already been washed many times and can be safely hand washed in warm water.
Molas are often sold in pairs, the pair consisting of the back and front panels of a blouse. The two molas are usually two variations on a theme. Matched molas complement each other and should be kept together.