Materials
By the Classical period, roughly the 5th and 4th centuries BC, monumental sculpture was composed almost entirely of marble or bronze, with cast bronze becoming the favoured medium for major works by the early 5th century BC. Many pieces of sculpture now known only in marble copies made for the Roman market had been originally made in bronze.
By the Classical period, roughly the 5th and 4th centuries BC, monumental sculpture was composed almost entirely of marble or bronze, with cast bronze becoming the favoured medium for major works by the early 5th century BC. Many pieces of sculpture now known only in marble copies made for the Roman market had been originally made in bronze. The territories of ancient Greece, except for Sicily and southern Italy, contained abundant supplies of fine marble, with Pentelic and Parian marble the most highly prized. The ores for bronze were also relatively easy to obtain. Smaller works were in a great variety of materials, many of them precious, but there was also a very large production of terracotta figurines.
Both marble and bronze are relatively easy to form and very durable. No doubt there were also traditions of sculpture in wood, as in most ancient cultures, but we know very little of them apart from acrolithic sculptures, usually large, in which the head and exposed flesh parts were carved in marble but the clothed parts in wood. Bronze always had a significant scrap value, so that very few original bronzes have survived. But in recent years marine archaeology or trawling have added a few spectacular finds, such as the Artemision Bronze and Riace bronzes, which have significantly extended modern understanding of ancient bronze art. Many copies from the later Roman period are marble versions of works whose originals had been cast in bronze. In the Archaic period ordinary limestone was used for sculpture, but thereafter (except in areas of the Italian peninsula with no local marble) only for architectural sculpture and decoration. Plaster or stucco was sometimes used, only for the hair.
Chryselephantine sculptures, used for temple cult images and luxury works, used gold (most often in leaf form) and ivory for all of the figure or for faces and hands. Probably some included gems and other materials, but these were much less common, and only fragments have survived.
Many statues were given jewellery, as can be seen from the holes for attaching it, and held weapons or other objects in different materials.