Greco-Roman period
During the Greco-Roman period of Egypt (332 BC–395 AD), when Egypt was ruled by the Greek Ptolemaic dynasty and then the Roman Empire, Egyptian architecture underwent significant changes due to the influence of Greek architecture. Although the rulers were new, they maintained a strong respect for native Egyptian religion and built many new temples or expanded old ones.
During the Greco-Roman period of Egypt (332 BC–395 AD), when Egypt was ruled by the Greek Ptolemaic dynasty and then the Roman Empire, Egyptian architecture underwent significant changes due to the influence of Greek architecture. Although the rulers were new, they maintained a strong respect for native Egyptian religion and built many new temples or expanded old ones.
The capital of the country was moved to the recently founded city of Alexandria on the shores of the Mediterranean. Its plan was largely that of a Greek city, with local elements mixed in. Most of the city has disappeared under the water or under the modern city today, but it was known from descriptions to contain many great buildings including a royal palace, the Musaeum, the Library of Alexandria, and the famous Pharos Lighthouse.
Many well-preserved temples in Upper Egypt date from this era, such as the Temple of Edfu, the Temple of Kom Ombo, and the Philae temple complex. While temple architecture remained more traditionally Egyptian, new Greco-Roman influences are evident, such as the appearance of Composite capitals. Egyptian motifs also made their way into wider Greek and Roman architecture.
Much of the period's funerary architecture has not survived, though some of Alexandria's underground catacombs, shared by the city's inhabitants to bury their dead, have been preserved. They feature a hybrid architectural style in which both classical and Egyptian decoration are mixed together. The Catacombs of Kom El Shoqafa, begun in the 1st century AD and continuously enlarged until the 3rd century, are one notable example and can be visited today.