Return controversy
Greek requests for return
In 1836, King Otto of the newly independent Greece formally asked the British government to return some of the Elgin Marbles (the four slabs of the frieze of the Temple of Athena Nike). In 1846, following a request from Greece, Britain sent a complete set of casts of the Parthenon frieze, and in 1890 the city of Athens unsuccessfully requested the return of the original frieze.
Greek requests for return
In 1836, King Otto of the newly independent Greece formally asked the British government to return some of the Elgin Marbles (the four slabs of the frieze of the Temple of Athena Nike). In 1846, following a request from Greece, Britain sent a complete set of casts of the Parthenon frieze, and in 1890 the city of Athens unsuccessfully requested the return of the original frieze. In 1927, the Greek minister in London unsuccessfully asked for the return of some architectural fragments. In 1983, the Greek government formally asked the British government to return "all the sculptures which were removed from the Acropolis of Athens and are at present in the British Museum", and in 1984, it listed the dispute with UNESCO. In 2000, a select committee of the British parliament held an inquiry into the illegal trade in cultural property, which considered the dispute over the marbles. The committee heard evidence from the then Greek foreign minister, George Papandreou, who argued that the question of legal ownership was secondary to the ethical and cultural arguments for returning the sculptures. The committee, however, made no recommendations on the future of the marbles.
In 2000, the Greek government commissioned the construction of a new Acropolis Museum, which opened in 2009. The museum was, in part, designed to arrange the surviving Parthenon sculptures (including those in the Elgin collection) as they originally stood on the Parthenon itself, and to counter arguments that the Elgin Marbles would be better preserved and displayed in the British Museum. The Acropolis Museum displays a portion of the remaining frieze (about 30% has been lost or destroyed), placed in their original orientation and in sight of the Parthenon. The position of the elements held in London are clearly marked with white casts, and space is left where the sculptures no longer survive.
In 2013, the Greek government asked UNESCO to mediate between the Greek and British authorities on the return of the marbles, but the British government and the British Museum declined UNESCO's offer to mediate. In 2021, UNESCO concluded that the British government had an obligation to return the sculptures and called upon the United Kingdom to open negotiations with Greece.
In late 2022, British and Greek authorities resumed negotiations on the future of the marbles. Asked about the possible return of the Marbles, the British Culture Secretary, Michelle Donelan replied: "I can sympathise with some of the arguments but I do think that is a very dangerous and slippy road to embark down", expressing the worry that other cultural items now held in Britain might also have to be returned to the places they were acquired from.
In November 2023, Prime Minister Rishi Sunak cancelled a meeting with the Greek prime minister Kyriakos Mitsotakis over public comments Mitsotakis made regarding the marbles.
Rationale for returning to Athens
Those arguing for the marbles' return cite legal, moral, cultural, conservation and artistic grounds. Their arguments include:
The marbles were obtained illegally, or at least unethically, and hence should be returned to their rightful owner.
While the marbles are of universal cultural value, they are also part of the unique cultural heritage of Greece, and this is the most fitting location for them to be displayed.
The Parthenon sculptures around the world should be reunited in order to restore "organic elements" which "at present remain without cohesion, homogeneity and historicity of the monument to which they belong" and allow visitors to better appreciate them as a whole.
Presenting all the extant Parthenon Marbles near their original historical and cultural environment, and in the context of other Greek antiquities, would permit their "fuller understanding and interpretation".
Safekeeping of the marbles would be ensured at the Acropolis Museum, as it is equipped with state-of-the-art technology for the protection and preservation of exhibits.
The Elgin Marbles have suffered significant damage from poor conservation and accidents in London and it cannot be assumed they will be better preserved there.
Returning the Parthenon sculptures would not set a precedent for other restitution claims because of the distinctively "universal value" of the Parthenon.
Rationale for remaining in London
A range of arguments has been presented by scholars, British political leaders and the British Museum for the retention of the Elgin Marbles in London. These include the following:
Elgin acquired the marbles legally and no court of law would find in favour of a Greek complainant.
Elgin rescued the marbles from destruction and those in the British Museum are in better condition than those left behind. The British Museum has a right to retain and publicly display what it preserved from destruction.
Bringing the Parthenon sculptures together as a unified whole is impossible as half had been lost or destroyed by 1800.
The British Museum display allows the marbles to be better viewed in the context of other major ancient cultures and thus complements the perspective provided by the Acropolis Museum collection.
Fulfilling all restitution claims would empty most of the world's great museums – this has also caused concerns among other European and American museums, with one potential target being the Nefertiti Bust in Berlin's Neues Museum; in addition, portions of Parthenon marbles are kept by many other European museums.
The British Museum receives about 6 million visitors per year as opposed to 1.5 million visitors to the Acropolis Museum. The removal of the marbles to Greece would significantly reduce the number of people who have the opportunity to visit the marbles.
The Elgin Marbles have been on public display in England since 1807 and in that time have become a part of the British cultural heritage.
Public campaigns for return
Outside Greece, a campaign for the return of the marbles began in 1981 with the formation of the International Organising Committee – Australia – for the Restitution of the Parthenon Marbles, and in 1983, with the formation of the British Committee for the Reunification of the Parthenon Marbles. Campaign organisations also exist in Greece and around the world.
A number of British and international celebrities, such as comedian Stephen Fry and actors Liam Neeson and George Clooney, have expressed their support for the return of the marbles.
Opinion polls
An Ipsos MORI poll of British voters in 1998, found 39% in favour of returning the marbles to Greece and 15% in favour of keeping them in Britain; 45% had no opinion or would not vote if the question were put to a referendum. Another Mori poll in 2002 showed similar results. A YouGov poll in 2021 found that 59% of British respondents thought the Parthenon marbles belonged in Greece, 18% that they belonged in Britain, and 18% did not know.
As of 2025, only one scientific poll of the Greek public has been conducted. The poll by Ipsos Greece in 2014 found that 93% of respondents thought the reunification of the marbles in Greece was "very important" or "a matter of national importance". Political scientist Ilias Nicolacopoulos stated that a probable reason for the lack of polling was that "we considered that public opinion in Greece would obviously adopt a clear, unanimous stance."
British press
The Guardian published an editorial in 2020 reiterating its support for the return of the Parthenon marbles. In January 2022, The Times reversed its long-standing support for retaining the marbles, publishing an editorial calling for their return to Greece. The Daily Telegraph published an editorial in January 2023 arguing that any decision on the return of the Elgin Marbles to Greece should be made by the British parliament.
British Museum Act 1963
The British Museum Act 1963 is an Act of the Parliament of the United Kingdom which forbids the British Museum from disposing of its holdings, except in a small number of special circumstances. Any change to the Act would have to be passed by Parliament.
Public debate in Greece
In September 2025, the Greek non-profit organisation Debate House hosted a public debate between four archaeologists and lawyers, two of which argued for the return of the marbles and two for their retention in the British Museum. One of the debate's organisers, Philippos Petropoulos, stated that it is rare for arguments for the retention of the marbles in Britain to be publicly expressed and debated in Greece.