Korean independence movement
Guerrilla resistance in Manchuria and Russia
Since the early 1900s, numerous Koreans based in Manchuria and Primorsky Krai in Russia waged a guerrilla war against the Japanese occupation. Beom-do Hong's unit ambushed and annihilated the Imperial Japanese Army that was advancing in Battle of Bongodong(Fengwudong) in June 1920.
Guerrilla resistance in Manchuria and Russia
Since the early 1900s, numerous Koreans based in Manchuria and Primorsky Krai in Russia waged a guerrilla war against the Japanese occupation. Beom-do Hong's unit ambushed and annihilated the Imperial Japanese Army that was advancing in Battle of Bongodong(Fengwudong) in June 1920. The combined forces of the independence army commanded by Kim Chwajin and Hong, while repeatedly retreating operationally, ambushed and killed about 1,500 Imperial Japanese soldiers in Battle of Cheongsanri(Qīngshānlǐ). In retaliation to the heavy losses at the Battle of Cheongsanri, the Imperial Japanese Army committed the Gando Massacre, massacring between 5,000 and tens of thousands of Korean civilians in Gando. The Japanese invasion of Manchuria in 1932 and subsequent Pacification of Manchukuo deprived many of these groups of their bases of operation and supplies. Many were forced to either flee elsewhere in China, or to join the Red Army-backed forces in eastern Russia. One of the guerrilla leaders in this region was the future dictator of North Korea, Kim Il Sung. These experiences served as a basis for Kim's legitimacy after the liberation of Korea.
March First Movement
In January 1919, Emperor Gojong died suddenly, which led to widespread theories that he had been poisoned by Japanese agents. Anti-Japanese sentiment flared amongst Koreans. In Tokyo, Korean students issued a February 8 Declaration of Independence that declared Korea independent from Japan. Inspired by this, Koreans in Seoul issued their own declaration of independence, which was prominently read aloud in Tapgol Park. This gave rise to the nationwide March 1 Movement peaceful protests; it is estimated that 2 million people took part in these rallies. However, they were violently suppressed by Japan; according to Korean records, over a year of demonstrations, 46,948 were arrested, 7,509 killed and 15,961 wounded. According to Japanese figures, 8,437 were arrested, 553 killed and 1,409 wounded.
Provisional Government of the Republic of Korea
After the repression of the March 1st Movement protests, Koreans fled the peninsula. A number of them congregated in Shanghai a month after the protests and founded a government-in-exile: the Korean Provisional Government (KPG). The government was highly diverse, with both left- and right-leaning members, and engaged in a range of political and militant efforts that advocated for Korea's independence. In 1931, member Kim Ku founded the Korean Patriotic Organization (KPO), a militant arm of the KPG. The KPO planned a number of attacks on Japanese government and colonial officials, including a 1932 assassination attempt on Emperor Hirohito and a bombing at a military rally in Shanghai.
After the Shanghai bombing, they were forced to flee the city, and eventually settled in Chongqing, where they received support from the Chinese government. There, Kim Ku, then the leader of the KPG, founded the Korean Liberation Army (KLA). The army fought in China and Burma, and prepared for its return to Korea as the tide of World War II turned against Japan. This culminated in the Eagle Project, a mission for the KPG and KLA to return to the peninsula and fight the Japanese. Ultimately, with the surprise of the atomic bomb droppings on Nagasaki and Hiroshima and the sudden end of the war, the mission did not come to pass.
Resistance within Korea
Within Korea itself, anti-Japanese rallies continued on multiple occasions. In 1926, the June Tenth Movement broke out in Keijō (Seoul) during the funeral of King Sunjong of Korea. Most notably, the Gwangju(Kōshū) Students Independence Movement on 3 November 1929 led to the strengthening of Japanese military rule in 1931, after which freedom of the press and freedom of expression were curbed. Many witnesses, including Catholic priests, reported that Japanese authorities dealt with insurgency severely. When villagers were suspected of hiding rebels, entire village populations are said to have been herded into public buildings (especially churches) and massacred when the buildings were set on fire. In the village of Teigan, Suigen District, Keiki Prefecture (now Jeam-ri, Hwaseong, Gyeonggi Province) for example, a group of 29 people were gathered inside a church which was then set afire.(Jeamni massacre)
On 10 December 1941, the Provisional Government of the Republic of Korea, under the presidency of Kim Ku, declared war on Japan and Germany.