Alternative interpretations
Abydos helicopter: A pareidolia based on palimpsest carving in an ancient Egyptian temple. Dendera Lamps: Supposed to depict light bulbs, but made in Ptolemaic Egypt, debunked by the analysis of the epigraphic text.
Abydos helicopter: A pareidolia based on palimpsest carving in an ancient Egyptian temple.
Dendera Lamps: Supposed to depict light bulbs, but made in Ptolemaic Egypt, debunked by the analysis of the epigraphic text. The motif actually represents a lotus flower.
Iron Man (Eiserner Mann): An old iron pillar, said to be a unique oddity in Germany, but consistent with medieval methods of ironworking.
Iron pillar of Delhi: A "rust-proof" iron pillar which supposedly demonstrates more advanced metallurgy than was available in India before 1000 CE.
London Hammer: Also known as the "London Artifact", a hammer made of iron and wood that was found in London, Texas, in 1936. Part of the hammer is encased in "400-million-year-old" ("Ordovician era") rock. In 1985, anthropologist John R. Cole hypothesized that the stone surrounding the hammer is a recent carbonate soil concretion.
Meister Print: A supposed human footprint from the Cambrian period, long before humans existed, which has been debunked as the result of a natural geologic process known as spall formation.
Pacal's sarcophagus lid: Described by Erich von Däniken as a depiction of a spaceship's cockpit.
Piri Reis map: Several authors, such as pseudohistorian Gavin Menzies and pseudoscientist Charles Hapgood, have suggested that this map, compiled by the Turkish admiral Piri Reis, showed Antarctica long before it was discovered (cf. Terra Australis).
Quimbaya airplanes: Golden objects found in Colombia and made by the Quimbaya civilization, which have been alleged to represent modern airplanes. In the Gold Museum, Bogotá, they are described as figures of birds and insects. Some of the artifacts have also been debunked as forgeries.
Saqqara Bird: Supposedly depicts a glider, but made in Ancient Egypt.
Shakōkidogū: Small humanoid and animal figurines made during the late Jōmon period (14,000–400 BCE) of prehistoric Japan, said to resemble extraterrestrial astronauts.
Stone spheres of Costa Rica: Inaccurately described as being perfectly spherical, and therefore demonstrating greater stone-working skill in pre-Columbian times than has previously been known.
Fuente Magna, a large stone vessel that was discovered in Bolivia in 1950, with many engravings on its inside that have been compared to Sumerian cuneiform writing. Archeologist and historian of the Near East Alexander H. Joffe has described the patterns as "geometric filler or deliberate gibberish" and thought the face on the interior resembles local Tiwanaku culture. He suggested it could be a fake or a local oddity.