General buildings
Countryside
These buildings were built of wood, usually logs similar to “Lincoln Logs" or log - cabin style. The roofs were covered in soil to keep the heat inside the house, and grass was planted in the soil on the roof to keep it from eroding away.
Countryside
These buildings were built of wood, usually logs similar to “Lincoln Logs" or log - cabin style. The roofs were covered in soil to keep the heat inside the house, and grass was planted in the soil on the roof to keep it from eroding away. These buildings were for farming the rough steep fjords. The buildings for farms were split into two parts, Innhus and Uthus. The Innhus was for food storage, sleeping and living. The Uthus were the buildings for animals, tools and animal fodder (animal food), in other words, the Uthus were the barns and silos.
Viking longhouse
Throughout the Norse lands, people lived in longhouses (langhús), which were typically 5 to 7 meters (16 to 23 ft) wide and anywhere from 15 to 75 meters (49 to 246 ft) long, depending on the wealth and social position of the owner. In much of the Norse region, the longhouses were built around wooden frames on simple stone footings. Walls were constructed of planks, of logs, or of wattle and daub. The walls were curved inwards to create a boat-like shape similar to the boating houses. The walls were covered with clay and vertical poles lined the inside to help create support. Multiple internal posts were built for further support. The roofs were thatched or slanted. Within the house there was a fireplace and flat beds along the wall for sitting or sleeping. If the owner did not have stables, the animals were housed in stalls at the end of the longhouse.
Hospitality was an important tradition for Vikings and travelers could be put up in longhouses. Banquets were held frequently to celebrate various festivals, as well as weddings and funerals. Specific banquets were held to teach proper etiquette as well as promoting hospitality and how a host should act towards their guests.
Icelandic turf houses
The common Icelandic turf house would have a large foundation made of flat stones; upon this was built a wooden frame which would hold the load of the turf. The turf would then be fitted around the frame in blocks often with a second layer, or in the more fashionable herringbone style. The doorway was place on the longitudinal side of the home and was the only entrance. The only external wood would be the doorway which would often be decorative; the doorway would lead into the hall which would commonly have a great fire. Another interesting aspect of the Icelandic turf house was the introduction of attached toilets, which were communal, and the act of going to the attached toilet was often done in large groups. The floor of a turf house could be covered with wood, stone or earth depending on the purpose of the building. They also had a fireplace that would be in the center of the house heating and lighting the whole house. Over time, the turf houses changed in size which directly related to their purpose and status of the owner. The turf house tradition was brought over by to Iceland by Nordic settlers where it originated from Northern Europe. Few settlers still know the practice of building turf to date and the true origins of the development of the turf building practice have been lost to time.
Oslo
Until 1624, Oslo was like any other Norse town (many wooden buildings together used for varying purposes), but in 1624, a fire burned down all of Oslo. Because of the fires, the King Christian IV moved Oslo west and ordered that all buildings in the city be built of stone or brick to prevent fires. Also to prevent fires, the streets were wide and met at right angles. After a time, the King allowed the people to “build half-timbered structures," which has the timber frame visible on both the inside and the outside of the building.