Religious buildings
Ritual houses
Before Christianity made its way to the Vikings and Scandinavia, it was a primarily pagan community. This required ritual houses which were not only religious buildings, but in earlier times were also used as a way to display the weapons of defeated enemies, showing the strength of the warriors and community.
Ritual houses
Before Christianity made its way to the Vikings and Scandinavia, it was a primarily pagan community. This required ritual houses which were not only religious buildings, but in earlier times were also used as a way to display the weapons of defeated enemies, showing the strength of the warriors and community. The architecture of the early structures was fairly simple and similar to other structures of the community. As time progressed the design became much more like that of a church with staggered and multi-layer roofs. The entrance to the ritual houses had ornamental designs. Rituals were completed outside the structure as it often involved burning and sacrifice of animals; due to this, the Vikings developed the outside of the houses to be ornamental rather than focusing on interior decoration.
Stave churches
Stave churches were used for Christian gatherings in the Norse region after the Christianization of Scandinavia. The roofs were often multi-layered, and they usually had a tower or spire in the middle of the highest layer of the roof. They were built of wood, and had stone walls around the base. The design for the stave churches most likely developed from ritual houses. But the inside was highly decorated with intricate designs. Most of these designs depict Jesus, a cross, or the disciples.
One of the most popular stave churches as recognized by UNESCO is the Urnes Stave Church, located in Sognefjord, Norway, which is still in use today. The space utilizes Romanesque styles in wooden form rather than the common stone material. It contains semi-circular columns and curved arches. The strap-work paneling showcases Viking tradition along with the carvings in the walls displaying fighting animals. The decorations are an essential connection between the pre-Christian Nordic traditions and the later Christianity of the Middle Ages as well as representing the artistic style of Scandinavian culture.