Colonial architecture
Colonial architecture is a hybrid architectural style that arose as colonists combined architectural styles from their country of origin with design characteristics of the settled country. Colonists frequently built houses and buildings in a style that was familiar to them but with local characteristics more suited to their new climate.
Below are links to specific articles about colonial architecture, specifically the modern colonies:
Colonial architecture is a hybrid architectural style that arose as colonists combined architectural styles from their country of origin with design characteristics of the settled country. Colonists frequently built houses and buildings in a style that was familiar to them but with local characteristics more suited to their new climate.
Below are links to specific articles about colonial architecture, specifically the modern colonies:
Spanish colonial architecture
Spanish colonial architecture is still found in the former colonies of the Spanish Empire in the Americas and in the Philippines. In Mexico, it is found in the Historic center of Mexico City, Puebla, Zacatecas, Querétaro, Guanajuato, and Morelia. Antigua Guatemala in Guatemala is also known for its well-preserved Spanish colonial style architecture. Other cities known for Spanish colonial heritage are Ciudad Colonial of Santo Domingo, the ports of Cartagena, Colombia, and Old San Juan in Puerto Rico.
North America
Viceroyalty of New Spain
Spanish Colonial architecture in Mexico
New Spanish Baroque
Spanish Colonial architecture in the United States
Spanish Colonial Revival architecture
Caribbean
Spanish West Indies
Spanish Colonial architecture in Cuba
Spanish Colonial architecture in the Dominican Republic
Spanish Colonial architecture in Puerto Rico
South America
Viceroyalty of Peru, Viceroyalty of New Granada, and Viceroyalty of the Río de la Plata
Spanish Colonial architecture in Argentina
Spanish Colonial architecture in Chile
Spanish Colonial architecture in Colombia
Spanish Colonial architecture in Peru
Spanish Colonial architecture in Venezuela
Spanish missions in South America
Spanish missions in Bolivia
Spanish missions in Brazil
Spanish missions in Paraguay
Asia
Spanish East Indies
Spanish Colonial architecture in the Philippines
Earthquake Baroque
Bahay na Bato
Portuguese colonial architecture
Portuguese colonial architecture is most visible in Brazil, Madeira, North Africa and Sub-Saharan Africa, Macau, the Malaysian city of Malacca, city of Goa in India, and Moluccas and Java in Indonesia.
Asia
Portuguese colonial architecture in India
Portuguese colonial architecture in Sri Lanka
Sino-Portuguese architecture
Centro Histórico de Macau
South America
Portuguese colonial architecture in Brazil
British colonial architecture
British colonial architecture are most visible in North America, the British West Indies, South Asia, Australia, New Zealand and South Africa.
North America
American colonial architecture
Federal architecture
First Period architecture
Colonial Georgian architecture
British colonial architecture in Canada
South Asia
British colonial architecture in India
British colonial architecture in Pakistan
British colonial architecture in Bangladesh
Colonial architecture in Sri Lanka
Australia
Colonial architecture of Australia
Federation architecture
Asia-Pacific
British colonial architecture in Hong Kong
British colonial architecture in Singapore
British Consulate at Takao
French colonial architecture
French colonial architecture is most visible in North America and Indochina.
Indochina
North America
French colonial architecture in North America
South Asia
French colonial architecture in India
Dutch colonial architecture
Dutch colonial architecture is most visible in Indonesia (especially Java and Sumatra), the United States, South Asia, and South Africa. In Indonesia, formerly Dutch East Indies, colonial architecture was studied academically and had developed into a new tropical architecture form which emphasizes on conforming to the tropical climate of the Indies and not completely imitating the architectural language of the Dutch colonists.
Indonesia
Dutch colonial architecture of Indonesia
Old Indies Style
Indies Empire style
New Indies Style
North America
Dutch colonial architecture in North America
Dutch Colonial Revival architecture
South Asia
Dutch colonial architecture in India
Colonial architecture in Sri Lanka
South Africa
Cape Dutch architecture
Russian colonial architecture
Russian colonial architecture is primarily represented in Siberia, Far East and Central Asia. The best example of Russian colonial architecture in Siberia is the architecture of Irkutsk, Tobolsk, Tomsk, Krasnoyarsk, Omsk and Yeniseysk. Russian colonial architecture in Siberia was primarily built out of wood due to the abundance of it in the region and is noticeable for its wooden carving.
Siberia
Siberian baroque
Lace houses
Central Asia
Soviet architecture in Central Asia
Turkey
Baltic style of Kars
Italian colonial architecture
Eritrea was Italy's first African colony. Its first capital, Massawa, contains a large amount of early Italian colonial architecture, characterized by historicism and inspiration from Venetian Gothic and Italian Neoclassical architecture. The colonial architecture and orthogonal street grid of Asmara, the colony's second capital, was inscribed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 2017. Much of the city's colonial architecture dates to the fascist era, during which Benito Mussolini encouraged architects and planners to transform the city into a "Little Rome".
Somalia also contains a wide range of Italian colonial architecture, dating back to its colonial era. In Mogadishu, the residence of most of the colony's eventual 50,000 Italian residents, colonial architects undertook large planning projects and erected monuments such as the still-extant triumphal arch dedicated to Umberto I, the largely destroyed Cathedral of Mogadiscio, and various government buildings. The Italian-built Villa Somalia remains Somalia's presidential residence. Unlike colonial schemes in Libya and Eritrea, Italian colonial authorities built within existing cities in Somalia, not building new villages or towns for settlers.
Before the consolidation of Italian Cyrenaica and Italian Tripolitania, Libya's colonial masters undertook significant building projects in Italian styles, such as the construction of Tripoli's Cathedral, built in a Venetian Gothic style. Following the founding of Italian Libya, Italian Fascist architecture became the standard for the massive infrastructural and settlement-related projects that Mussolini's Italy undertook. In cities such as Tripoli and Benghazi, colonial architects and urban planners undertook large-scale urban projects, such as the construction of Benghazi's monumental Lungomare (sea-walk), new urban districts for Italian settlers, and Catholic religious buildings, including Benghazi's and Tripoli's cathedrals. The fascist government's constructions were usually characterized by use of the Italian Rationalist and Neoclassical styles. Starting in 1938, the colony's Public Works Department sponsored the building of 27 new villages meant for Italian settlement, mostly in Cyrenaica, which epitomized a Rationalism informed by local Arab architectural mores. Giovanni Pellegrini, one of the most prominent designers of these agrarian villages, attempted to synthesize Arab and Italian architecture to settlements best fitted to Cyrenaica's arid climate.
Italy's occupation of the Dodecanese bore a significant amount of modernist and art deco buildings throughout the archipelago. Colonial architects also constructed several new towns and villages, such as Portolago, now known as Lakki. Contrasting with much of the built remnants of Italian colonialism in Africa, Italian architecture in the Dodecanese often remains in good repair.
Italy's brief colonial undertaking in Albania resulted in a prominent collection of Rationalist buildings, including the Bank of Albania, the Prime Minister's Office, and the National Theatre.
See also
Colonial Revival architecture
American colonial architecture
References
External links
Website on colonial architecture with 29,000 pictures of colonial buildings around the world by Gauvin Alexander Bailey of Queen's University and funded by the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada and the National Endowment for the Humanities