Spanish East Indies
The arrival of the Spaniards in 1571 brought in European colonial architecture to the Philippines. Specifically suited for the hot tropics of the new Far East territory, European architecture was transposed via Acapulco, Mexico into a uniquely Filipino style.
The arrival of the Spaniards in 1571 brought in European colonial architecture to the Philippines. Specifically suited for the hot tropics of the new Far East territory, European architecture was transposed via Acapulco, Mexico into a uniquely Filipino style. The nipa hut or bahay kubo of the Indigenous Filipinos gave way to the bahay na bato (stone house) and other Filipino houses collectively called Bahay Filipino (Filipino houses) and became the typical houses of Filipinos in the past. Bahay na bato were also referred to as arquitectura mestiza ("mixed architecture") by the Jesuit priest Ignacio Alzina in 1668 due to it being composed of both wood and stone.
The Bahay Filipino houses followed the nipa hut's arrangements, such as open ventilation and elevated apartments. The most obvious difference between Filipino houses would be the materials that were used to build them. The bahay na bato is a hybrid of native Austronesian and Spanish architecture. Its most common appearance is like that of a stilt nipa hut standing on Spanish-style stone blocks or bricks as a foundation instead of just wood or bamboo stilts. It would usually have solid stone foundations or brick lower walls, and overhanging, wooden upper story/stories with balustrades, ventanillas and capiz-shell sliding sashes on windows. The roof was either a Spanish-style curving clay tile roof (teja de curva) or a thatched nipa roof. The latter was largely replaced by galvanized iron roofs in the late 19th century. Today these houses are more commonly called ancestral houses, due to most ancestral houses in the Philippines being bahay na bato.
Earthquake Baroque is a style of Baroque architecture found in the Philippines, which suffered destructive earthquakes during the 17th century and 18th century, where large public buildings, such as churches, were rebuilt in a Baroque style. In the Philippines, destruction of earlier churches from frequent earthquakes have made the church proportion lower and wider; side walls were made thicker and heavily buttressed for stability during shaking. The upper structures were made with lighter materials.
Bell towers are usually lower and stouter compared to towers in less seismically active regions of the world. Towers have thicker girth in the lower levels, progressively narrowing to the topmost level. In some churches of the Philippines, aside from functioning as watchtowers against pirates, some bell towers are detached from the main church building to avoid damage in case of a falling bell tower due to an earthquake.