Africa
Egypt
The Library of Alexandria was destroyed during the Palmyrene invasion of Egypt and the following Roman counterattack during the 3rd century AD. The Lighthouse of Alexandria, one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World, was damaged then destroyed by earthquakes over the 8th to 14th centuries, collapsing around 1341 CE.
Egypt
The Library of Alexandria was destroyed during the Palmyrene invasion of Egypt and the following Roman counterattack during the 3rd century AD.
The Lighthouse of Alexandria, one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World, was damaged then destroyed by earthquakes over the 8th to 14th centuries, collapsing around 1341 CE.
Villa Aghion, a modernist villa built by Auguste Perret in Alexandria was demolished for redevelopment in 2014.
A rock-cut portion of the Temple of Gerf Hussein, flooded by Lake Nasser.
The building the Institut d'Égypte occupied was burned down and many documents with it on 17 December 2011 during anti-government demonstrations of the Arab Spring. It reopened in December 2012.
Libya
During the 2011 Libyan Civil War, various sites were vandalized, looted, or destroyed.
The Islamic State destroyed the tomb of Zuhayr ibn Qays, located at the As-Sahabah Mosque in Derna, in 2012 and May 2014.
In March 2015, during the second civil war, the Islamic State destroyed Sufi shrines near Tripoli.
Madagascar
In November 1995, a fire broke out in the Rova of Antananarivo, a royal palace of the Merina Kingdom since the 17th century. The fire destroyed or severely damaged all of its buildings. The last two reconstruction phases started in 2010, and by July 2020 the entire structure had been refurbished.
Mali
Parts of the World Heritage Site of Timbuktu were intentionally destroyed in the aftermath of the 2012 Fall of Timbuktu.
Nigeria
During the Benin Expedition of 1897, the British Empire launched a military campaign against Benin City, the capital of the Kingdom of Benin, during which much of the city was burned and numerous artefacts were looted.
South Africa
The 2021 Table Mountain fire partially or completely gutted several significant buildings and collections in the University of Cape Town. This included:
Mostert's Mill, which had been built in 1796
The university's Special Collections Library, which held over 1,300 collections and over 85,000 books and other items, including,
A historically significant Bible,
An original illustration of The Jungle Book, drawings,
Maps and transcripts of stories from the indigenous peoples of the Cape,
A major dictionary of the Xhosa language; copies of historic Xhosa language newspapers,
Papers by Ray Alexander Simons, and archives of papers relating to many anti-apartheid movements.
The fire completely gutted the Library's Reading Room. The vast majority of the African Studies Published Print Collection (about 70,000 items) and the entirety of the African Studies Film Collection DVDs (about 3,500 items) was destroyed, along with documents relating to the university itself.
Sudan
Faras Cathedral was flooded by Lake Nasser. Some paintings were salvaged and are now in the Faras Gallery in Warsaw in Poland, and others were transferred to the National Museum of Sudan in Khartoum, which may now also be lost or destroyed as a result of the Sudanese civil war.
Most of the artifacts from the National Museum of Sudan were stolen or destroyed by the Rapid Support Forces between 2023 and 2025 during the Sudanese civil war.
Zimbabwe
The medieval city of Great Zimbabwe has faced the removal of gold and artifacts in amateur digging by early colonial antiquarians. Notably, digs by Richard Nicklin Hall, who was determined to find evidence that the monument was not built by indigenous Africans until he eventually relinquished this belief. More extensive damage was caused by the mining of ruins for gold. Reconstruction attempts since 1980 caused further damage, alienating local communities. Visitors have caused further damage, with many cases of people climbing the walls, walking over archaeological deposits, and the over-use of certain paths. This is in conjunction with natural damage from vegetation growth, foundations settling, and weathering.