Europe
Albania
Sulejman Pasha Mosque, the dome and mosque were destroyed during World War II, while its minaret remained until 1967, when the communist regime of Enver Hoxha built a war memorial in its place.  Austria
Vienna's Cathedral of St.
Albania
Sulejman Pasha Mosque, the dome and mosque were destroyed during World War II, while its minaret remained until 1967, when the communist regime of Enver Hoxha built a war memorial in its place.
Austria
Vienna's Cathedral of St. Stephen was severely damaged by fire in 1945, towards the end of the Second World War. Incendiary bombs and shelling had set the roof on fire, and the cathedral's original larch girders, said to be made from an entire forest of larches, were destroyed, as were the Rollinger choir stalls, carved in 1487. The building was rebuilt soon after the war.
Belgium
The Palace of Coudenberg in Brussels burned down in 1731 and its ruins were demolished half a century later.
Many churches and abbeys were demolished during the French occupation in the late 18th century, amongst them the St. Lambert's Cathedral in Liège, the St. Donatian's Cathedral and Eekhout Abbey in Bruges, Florennes Abbey in Florennes, and St. Michael's Abbey in Antwerp.
The Herkenrode Abbey in Hasselt survived the French Revolution, but subsequently fell into disrepair. In 1826 a fire destroyed much of the church, and the remaining ruins were demolished in 1844.
On 25 August 1914, during World War I, the university library of Leuven was destroyed by the Germans against the backdrop of other war crimes. 230,000 volumes were lost, including medieval and Renaissance manuscripts and more than 1,000 incunabula. After the war, a new library was built. During World War II, the new building was again set on fire and nearly a million books were lost.
During World War I, the city of Ypres was destroyed, including its Town Hall and Cloth Hall. These monuments were later rebuilt.
The Maison du Peuple in Brussels, one of the largest works of architect Victor Horta, was demolished in 1965 to make way for an office building. The surviving townhouses in Brussels designed by Horta were declared UNESCO World Heritage in 2000.
Château Miranda, a 19th-century neo-Gothic castle in Celles was demolished in 2016–17.
The Valemprez farm, a 13th-century farmhouse rebuilt in the 18th century in Dottignies, was demolished in 2008
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Through the course of the Bosnian War, numerous sites of cultural and religious heritage were destroyed:
During the Siege of Sarajevo, culturicide was committed by the Army of Republika Srpska. The National and University Library of Bosnia and Herzegovina was specifically targeted and besieged by cannons positioned all around the city and it was destroyed in the fire, along with 80 percent of its contents. Some 3 million books destroyed, along with hundreds of original documents from the Ottoman Empire and the Austro-Hungarian monarchy.
Muslim heritage sites suffered the most, with 614 mosques and several other religious facilities, schools, and institutions destroyed by the authorities of the Republic of Srpska as a part of the ethnic cleansing campaign against the local Muslim populations. The most well known among them include Mehmed Pasha Kukavica Mosque, Arnaudija Mosque, and Ferhat Pasha Mosque. A substantial proportion of these mosques dated back to the Ottoman and Austro-Hungarian era. Many of them, such as the Ferhadija and Arnaudija mosques, have since been rebuilt with financial and professional assistance from Turkey.
The Ottoman clock tower of Banja Luka Banjalučka sahat-kula was also destroyed in line with efforts to destroy all Ottoman heritage sites in the region.
Roman Catholic sites also suffered with more than 269 churches being destroyed, which was associated with the killings of Bosnian Croats, mostly by Bosnian Serbs.
As many as 125 Serbian Orthodox religious buildings were destroyed in the war, such as the 13th-century Sase Monastery and Vozuća Monastery.
Parts of the old city of Mostar, including the Stari Most, were destroyed by the Croatian Defence Council. The Stari Most has been rebuilt. Another symbol of the city, the monumental Serbian Orthodox Cathedral of the Holy Trinity was shelled, set afire, and finally blown up by the local Croat forces. The reconstruction of the church is ongoing as of 2020.
Croatia
In the Independent State of Croatia 450 Serb Orthodox churches and monasteries were destroyed along with monumental iconostasis, thousands of icons and number of manuscripts and books which included archival books about births, weddings and deaths. The destroyed ritual items were of great cultural and historical importance and beauty.
War damage of the Croatian War of Independence (1991–1995) has been assessed on 2,271 protected cultural monuments, with the damage cost being estimated at 407 million DM. The largest numbers – 683 damaged cultural monuments – are located in the area of Dubrovnik and Neretva County. Most are situated in Dubrovnik itself. The entire buildings and possessions of 481 Roman Catholic churches, several synagogues, and several Serbian Orthodox churches were badly damaged or destroyed. Valuable inventories were looted from over 100 churches. The most drastic example of destruction of cultural monuments, art objects, and artifacts took place in Vukovar. After the occupation of the devastated city by the Yugoslav Army and Serbian paramilitary forces, portable cultural property was removed from shelters and museums in Vukovar to museums and archives in Serbia.
Church of St. Nicholas, Karlovac, destroyed between 1991 and 1993. Renovated in 2007.
Medieval Dragović monastery, Vrlika, destroyed in 1995. Reestablished in 2004.
After Croatia gained independence, about 3,000 memorials dedicated to the anti-fascist resistance and the victims of fascism were destroyed.
In September 1991, Croatian forces entered the memorial site of the Jasenovac Concentration Camp and vandalized the museum building, while exhibitions and documentation were destroyed, damaged and looted.
Cyprus
Following Cypriot intercommunal violence (which ultimately led to the 1974 Cypriot coup d'état and the 1974 Turkish invasion of Cyprus), many Ottoman-era mosques were destroyed after the Turkish Cypriots left.
Czech Republic
The Old Town Hall in Prague was severely damaged by fire during the Prague uprising of 1945. The chamber where George of Poděbrady was elected King of Bohemia was devastated; the town hall's bell, the oldest in Bohemia, dating from 1313, was melted; and the city archives, comprising 70,000 volumes (most of which were transported to the outskirts of Prague due to the fear of the bombardment), as well as historically priceless manuscripts, were destroyed.
The Vinohrady Synagogue (one of Europe's largest Synagogues) was destroyed during the Bombing of Prague.
Denmark
In the Copenhagen Fire of 1728, a great part of medieval Copenhagen was destroyed.
Christiansborg Palace, the main residence of the Danish Kings, was destroyed by fire in 1794.
In the Copenhagen Fire of 1795, a great part of medieval and renaissance Copenhagen vanished.
Hirschholm Palace, the summer residence of the Danish Kings, was demolished in 1809–1813 after its role in the affair between Johann Friedrich Struensee and Queen Caroline Matilda of Great Britain in the 1770s.
Frederiksborg Castle, residence and coronation castle of the Danish king, severely damaged by fire in 1859.
The Børsen, a 17th-century stock exchange building in Copenhagen, was partially destroyed, including its iconic spire, in a fire on 16 April 2024.
Estonia
During World War II, 98% of the town of Narva was destroyed due to Soviet bombing raids. Only 3 pre-war buildings, including the town hall, are still remaining.
France
In the aftermath of the French Revolution, many historic structures, such as castles and monasteries, were destroyed by the revolutionaries as tangible symbols of the ancien régime. Examples include the Bastille (rapidly demolished in 1789), Cluny Abbey (the largest church in Christendom when built, demolished between 1800 and 1810, and quarried for stone thereafter) and Jumièges Abbey.
Most of the French Crown Jewels, including the famous Crown of Charlemagne, were melted down or destroyed during the French Revolution.
During the Siege of Strasbourg that took place at the height of the Franco-Prussian War in 1870, the total destruction by shelling and fire of the municipal library and the municipal art and archaeology collections resulted in the loss of 400,000 books, 3,446 Medieval manuscripts, and thousands of incunables, as well as of hundreds of paintings, stained glass windows, and archaeological artefacts. The most famous lost object was the original manuscript of the Hortus deliciarum.
On 23 May 1871, the Tuileries Palace, which had been the usual Parisian residence of French monarchs, was almost entirely gutted in a fire set by members of the Paris Commune, leaving only the stone shell. It was subsequently demolished in 1883. The Château de Saint-Cloud was destroyed by Prussians during the Franco-Prussian war. Other destroyed palaces in France include the Château de Meudon and the Château de Bellevue.
In 1914, Reims Cathedral was burned as a result of shelling during the initial phase of the First World War. The cathedral was rebuilt after the war.
In 1917, the Château de Coucy was blown up by the retreating Germans, destroying its important 13th century donjon.
The 1978 Palace of Versailles bombing severely damaged parts of the Palace of Versailles, including several priceless pieces of art. The palace was rebuilt and reopened to the public within four years.
On 15 April 2019, the roof of the Notre-Dame de Paris caught fire, severely damaging the bell towers and resulting in the total collapse of the central spire and roof. The fire is believed to have been caused by the ongoing restoration, though an investigation is ongoing. Repairs to the building were completed in 2024, and the cathedral reopened in December 2024.
Germany
Many historically and architecturally significant buildings were destroyed or severely damaged during World War II and the post-war period as a result of the Allied policy of area bombing of cities aimed at destroying or weakening infrastructure and war-related industry in the German Reich, as well as demoralizing the population by destroying urban cores and residential neighborhoods. Several hundred cities were destroyed, many of them by more than 80 percent. Examples are palaces like Berlin Palace, Monbijou Palace, and City Palace, Potsdam, as well as churches like Dresden Frauenkirche, Berlin Cathedral, and Kaiser Wilhelm Memorial Church. Several have been rebuilt since 1990 (including all those mentioned except Monbijou Palace and Kaiser Wilhelm Memorial Church).
The Paulinerkirche was a medieval church from 1231 in Leipzig. The church survived the war practically unscathed but was dynamited in 1968 during the communist regime of East Germany. After the reunification of Germany, a new building in a contemporary style, the Paulinum, was built on the site. East German authorities destroyed several other religious and aristocracy-related buildings as not in line with their vision of a "Worker and Peasant State" – some of those buildings had already been damaged by the war.
The building housing the Historical Archive of the City of Cologne collapsed on 3 March 2009, during construction for an extension of the Cologne Stadtbahn.
The Church of St. Lambertus in Immerath was demolished on 9 January 2018 as part of the demolition of the entire village to make way for an expansion of the Garzweiler surface mine. The church had been added to the list of heritage monuments in Erkelenz on 14 May 1985.
In October 2020, artworks displayed at museums at Museumsinsel in Berlin were vandalized with a liquid that left stains on the artifacts.
Numerous synagogues throughout Germany were destroyed during the Nazi era (1933–1945), particularly during or slightly after the November Pogroms of 1938. Their post-war reconstruction was hampered by the Jewish community having fled or been murdered and in some cases Old Nazis remaining in local administrative positions preventing rebuilding.
After reunification some important representative buildings of East Germany were demolished, most notably Palast der Republik where asbestos contamination was cited as a reason for demolition
In the course of post-war reconstruction in line with the vision of an automotive city several old towns were destroyed or significantly impacted to make way for highways, parking lots and other car-related infrastructure
The Duchess Anna Amalia Library in Weimar containing numerous irreplaceable rare books burned down in 2004
Much of Germany's industrial heritage, including railways, historic factories and canals has been destroyed. Very little of the Bavarian Ludwig Railway (Germany's first passenger steam railway) remains, the Ludwig-Donau-Main-Kanal was abandoned and much of it subsequently filled in to build German federal highway A73 and the historic Lehrter Bahnhof in Berlin was torn down to make way for the current Berlin Hauptbahnhof
The construction of Waldschlösschen Bridge led UNESCO to withdraw its designation of the Dresden Elbe Valley as a UNESCO World Heritage Site. It's one of only three Former UNESCO World Heritage Sites in the world.
During and after the Protestant Reformation religiously motivated iconoclasts destroyed religious art and architecture. This process lasted until the end of the Thirty Years War
Besides deliberate acts of destruction like the Sack of Magdeburg which all but depopulated a city of some 25,000 inhabitants, the Thirty Years War also destroyed most church records and many buildings due to ransacking, plunder and arson. As most genealogical records were kept in churches at the time, genealogical research meets a bottleneck during that historical era.
Greece
The Colossus of Rhodes, one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World, was destroyed in the 226 BC Rhodes earthquake, and its remains were destroyed in the 7th century AD while Rhodes was under Arab rule. In December 2015, a group of European architects announced plans to build a modern Colossus where the original once stood.
The Statue of Zeus at Olympia, also a Wonder of the Ancient World, was destroyed around the 5th century CE, although it is not known exactly when or how.
The Parthenon was extensively damaged in 1687 in the Morean theatre of the Great Turkish War (1683–1699). The Ottoman army fortified the Acropolis of Athens and used the Parthenon as a gunpowder magazine and a shelter for members of the local Turkish community. On 26 September, a Venetian mortar round blew up the magazine, and the explosion blew out the building's central portion. About three hundred people were killed in the explosion, which caused fires that burned until the following day and consumed many homes. The Parthenon was extensively and permanently damaged when Thomas Bruce, the 7th Earl of Elgin and ambassador to the Ottoman Empire (occupiers of Greece in the early 19th century), who admired the Parthenon's extensive collection of ancient marble sculptures, began extracting and expatriating them to Britain in 1801. More damage to the site's heritage came after independence, when all Medieval and Ottoman features of the Acropolis (most notably the Frankish Tower) were destroyed by Heinrich Schliemann in a project to rid the site of all post-Classical influence.
Las Incantadas, a Roman pillared portico with mythological reliefs was demolished by Emmanuel Miller in 1864, who attempted to transfer the entire monument to France. The building collapsed while Miller took the sculptures, which are now in the Louvre.
Hungary
Numerous historical buildings in Budapest were damaged or destroyed during World War II, including the Hungarian Parliament Building, the Chain Bridge, and the Sándor Palace.
Ireland
During the Battle of Dublin at the beginning of the Irish Civil War in 1922, munitions were stored at the Four Courts building, which housed 1,000 years of Irish records in the Public Record Office. Under circumstances that are disputed, the munitions exploded, destroying much of Ireland's historical record.
The Irish Republican Army followed a policy of deliberate destruction of Irish country houses (1919–1923).
Italy
Many ancient Roman temples, statues, scrolls, buildings and entire cities.
In around 1505, Pope Pius II had the historic ancient St. Peter's Basilica demolished to make way for a replacement. The architect, Donato Bramante, also carelessly destroyed many of the tombs in the Basilica.
Many historic gardens and villas were destroyed in Rome in the 19th century, including Villa Ludovisi, Villa Negroni and Villa Astalli;
The Tower of Paul III and Convent of Aracoeli were demolished to make room for the Victor Emmanuel Monument.
Various historic buildings were demolished in the 19th and 20th centuries to make way for railways, industrial areas, or other modern buildings. Examples include the Castello di Villagonia and the Real Cittadella in Sicily.
Many historic buildings in Italy were destroyed or damaged during World War II. These include the monastery of Monte Cassino, which was destroyed during the Battle of Monte Cassino.
Several historic buildings, books, paintings, and sculptures were destroyed during the Florence Flood of 1966.
Several churches and other heritage sites were damaged or destroyed during earthquakes such as the 1997 Umbria and Marche earthquake, the 2009 L'Aquila earthquake, and the August 2016 Central Italy earthquake.
Kosovo
During the Yugoslavia period there was destruction of Albanian heritage endorsed by the state. A number of Albanian cultural sites in Kosovo were destroyed during the Kosovo conflict (1998–1999) which constituted a war crime violating the Hague and Geneva Conventions. 225 out of 600 mosques in Kosovo were damaged, vandalised, or destroyed alongside other Islamic architecture and Islamic libraries and archives with records spanning 500 years. Additionally 500 Albanian owned kulla dwellings (traditional stone tower houses) and three out of four well preserved Ottoman period urban centres located in Kosovo cities were badly damaged resulting in great loss of traditional architecture. Kosovo's public libraries, in particular 65 out of 183 were completely destroyed with a loss of 900,588 volumes. During the war, Islamic architectural heritage posed for Yugoslav Serb paramilitary and military forces as Albanian patrimony with destruction of non-Serbian architectural heritage being a methodical and planned component of ethnic cleansing in Kosovo.
During World War II, a number of Serbian Orthodox religious sites were damaged or destroyed. During the 1968 and 1981 protests, Serbian Orthodox religious sites were the target of vandalism. This continued during the 1980s. NATO bombing in March–June 1999 resulted in some accidental damage to churches and a mosque. Revenge attacks against Serbian religious sites commenced following the conflict and the return of hundreds of thousands of Kosovo Albanian refugees to their homes. Serbian cultural sites in Kosovo were systematically destroyed in the aftermath of the Kosovo War and 2004 ethnic violence. According to the International Center for Transitional Justice this includes 155 destroyed Serbian Orthodox churches and monasteries as well as Medieval Monuments in Kosovo, which were inscribed on the List of World Heritage in Danger.
Malta
Parts of the megalithic Xagħra Stone Circle in Gozo were deliberately destroyed in around 1834–1835 and its megaliths were broken down to form masonry which was used in the construction of a nearby farmhouse. The site was forgotten for over a century before being rediscovered in the late 20th century.
A number of buildings of historical or architectural importance which had been included on the Antiquities List were destroyed by aerial bombardment during World War II, including Auberge d'Auvergne, Auberge de France and the Slaves' Prison in Valletta, the Clock Tower, Auberge d'Allemagne and Auberge d'Italie in Birgu, and two out of three megalithic temples at Kordin. Others such as Fort Manoel also suffered severe damage, but were rebuilt after the war.
Other buildings which were not included on the Antiquities List but which had significant cultural importance were also destroyed during the war. The most notable of these was the Royal Opera House in Valletta, which is considered as "one of the major architectural and cultural projects undertaken by the British" by the Superintendence of Cultural Heritage.
The Gourgion Tower in Xewkija, which was included on the Antiquities List, was demolished by American forces in 1943 to make way for an airfield. Many of its inscriptions and decorated stones were retrieved and they are in storage at Heritage Malta.
Palazzo Fremaux, a building included on the Antiquities List and which was scheduled as a Grade 2 property, was gradually demolished between 1990 and 2003. The demolition was condemned by local residents, the local government and non-governmental organizations.
The Azure Window, a 28-metre-tall (92 ft) limestone natural arch on the island of Gozo in Malta was one of Malta's major tourist attractions and was featured in several films. It was located in Dwejra Bay in the limits of San Lawrenz, close to the Inland Sea and the Fungus Rock. The formation was anchored on the east end by the seaside cliff, arching over open water, to be anchored to a free standing pillar in the sea to the west of the cliff. It was created when two limestone sea caves collapsed. Following years of natural erosion causing parts of the arch to fall into the sea, the arch and free standing pillar collapsed completely during a storm in March 2017.
Villa St Ignatius, a 19th-century villa with historical and architectural significance, was partially demolished in late 2017. This was condemned by numerous non-governmental organizations and other entities.
Netherlands
The German bombing of Rotterdam that took place on 14 May 1940, also known as the Rotterdam Blitz, decimated most of the historical city center of the Dutch city. During the bombing, hundreds of years worth of architecture and artwork were destroyed within hours.
De Noord, a tower mill which had survived the Rotterdam Blitz, suffered a fire in July 1954 and was demolished soon after.
Norway
From 1992 to 1995, members of the Norwegian black metal scene began a wave of arson attacks on medieval Christian churches. By 1996, there had been at least 50 attacks.
Poland
Warsaw Old Town, including the Royal Castle, Warsaw, Warsaw New Town, Łazienki Park including the Łazienki Palace, and Ujazdowski Castle, were destroyed by Nazi Germany in 1944, and later rebuilt from the 1950s to 1980s.
Portugal
Lisbon was almost destroyed during the 1755 Lisbon earthquake and subsequent fire and tsunami.
A small section of the 19th-century quarter Chiado was destroyed by fire on 25 August 1988. The eighteen damaged buildings were rebuilt in the following 20 years.
Romania
The 60-meter-high tower of Rotbav fortified church, dating back to the 13th century, collapsed on 20 February 2016.
Many historical buildings were demolished to construct the Centrul Civic in Bucharest.
Many old towns of different cities were destroyed partially or completely because of communist urban planning. Old towns of cities like Bacău, Bârlad, Câmpina, Galați, Orșova, Pitești, Ploiești, Râmnicu Vâlcea, and Suceava were completely demolished.
The 1989 fire of the Central University Library in Bucharest destroyed over 500,000 books and 3,700 manuscripts, including manuscripts of famous Romanian writings, such as Mircea Eliade's novel manuscripts.
Russia
In Moscow alone losses of 1917–2006 are estimated at over 640 notable buildings (including 150 to 200 listed buildings, out of a total inventory of 3,500) – some disappeared completely, others were replaced with concrete replicas.
President Boris Yeltsin ordered the shelling of the White House, seat of the Russian government, during his 1993 consolidation of power, causing a large fire and considerable damage to the top floors.
'Mephistopheles', figure on a St Petersburg building on Lakhtinksaya Street known as the House with Mephistopheles, smashed by a fundamentalist Orthodox group in 2015.
The original buildings of Metrowagonmash plant, founded by Savva Mamontov in 1897 and built in Russian Gothic style, were demolished between 2016 and 2019 to make way for block houses.
Serbia
A number of culturally and historically important buildings were destroyed in Belgrade during Operation Retribution, the Allied bombing of Yugoslavia in World War II, and other battles. Destroyed buildings include the National Library of Serbia and the library's collection of 500,000 volumes and invaluable collection of medieval Cyrillic manuscripts and charters, King Alexander Bridge, Old Post Office, El Kal Synagogue, Beth Israel synagogue and others.
Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia demolished dozens of synagogues in Vojvodina after World War II as preserving religious buildings and relics wasn't considered to be important.
The Yugoslav Ministry of Defence building, a cultural monument, was partially destroyed during the NATO bombing of Yugoslavia in 1999. NATO bombing also resulted in the damaging of medieval monuments, such as Gračanica Monastery, the Patriarchate of Peć and the Visoki Dečani, which are on the UNESCO's World Heritage list today. The University Hospital Center Dr Dragiša Mišović, founded in 1922, was destroyed. The Avala Tower, one of the most iconic symbols of the Serbian capital, was destroyed during the bombing.
Slovenia
Partisan forces or their successors destroyed approximately 100 castles and manors during and after the Second World War. Examples include Ajman Manor, Belnek Castle, Boštanj Castle, Brdo Castle, Čušperk Castle, Dol Mansion, Dolena Castle, Gracar Castle, Haasberg Castle, Klevevž Castle, Kolovec Castle, Križ Castle, Krupa Castle, Mokronog Castle, Pogonik Castle, Radelstein Castle, Soteska Castle, Špitalič Manor, Turn Castle, and Volčji Potok Manor.
An Allied raid heavily damaged Žužemberk Castle during the Second World War.
Many churches were destroyed during and after World War II. Examples include the churches in Ajbelj, Dragatuš, Dvor, Gabrje, Hinje, Koče, Kočevska Reka, Morava, Plešivica, Ptuj, Srobotnik pri Velikih Laščah, Stari Log, Trava, Velika Račna, Zafara, and Žužemberk.
Soviet Union
During February–March 1944, the Soviet conducted the expulsion of the Chechens and Ingush from the North Caucasus as a part of the Soviet forced settlement program of the non-Russian ethnic minorities. The operation resulted in the deportation of 496,000 Chechens and Ingush populations, and the death of around a quarter of them. It was also accompanied by the destruction of local cultural and societal heritages; names of these nations were erased from the books and records; placenames were replaced with Russian ones; mosques were demolished; villages were razed; and the historical Nakh language manuscripts were almost destroyed.
The native Crimean Tatars were deported by the Soviets from the peninsula in May 1944. Afterward, the government engaged in a full-scale detatarization campaign to continue the ethnic cleansing campaign, all the Tatar placenames being replaced with Russian ones, and the Muslim graveyards and religious objects were destroyed or converted into secular places.
A new anti-religious campaign was launched in 1929 and the destruction of churches in the cities peaked around 1932. Several churches were demolished, including the Cathedral of Christ the Saviour in Moscow and St. Michael's Cathedral in Izhevsk. Both of these were rebuilt in the 1990s and 2000s.
In 1959 Nikita Khrushchev launched his anti-religious campaign. By 1964 over 10 thousand churches out of 20 thousand were shut down (mostly in rural areas) and many were demolished. Of 58 monasteries and convents operating in 1959, only sixteen remained by 1964; of Moscow's fifty churches operating in 1959, thirty were closed and six demolished.
Spain
Because of the Ecclesiastical confiscations of Mendizábal, secularization of church properties in 1835–1836, several hundreds of church buildings, monasteries, or civil buildings owned by the Church were partly or completely demolished. Many of the art works, libraries and archives contained were lost or pillaged in the time the buildings were abandoned and without owners. Among them were important buildings as Santa Caterina convent (the first gothic building in Iberian Peninsula) and Sant Francesc convent (gothic too, one of the richest in the country), both in Barcelona, or San Pedro de Arlanza Roman monastery, near Burgos, now ruined.
Several monuments demolished in Calatayud: the church of Convent of Dominicos of San Pedro Mártir (1856), Convent of Trinidad (1856), Church of Santiago (1863), Church of San Torcuato and Santa Lucía (1869) and Church of San Miguel (1871).
The leaning Torre Nueva in Zaragoza was demolished in 1892 amidst fears that it would topple.
Palacio de los Lasso de Castilla was a 15th-century palace in Madrid which became the palace or residence of the Catholic Monarchs. It was demolished during the mid 19th century.
Churches, monasteries, convents and libraries were destroyed during the Spanish Civil War.
A Virxe da Barca sanctuary, located in Muxia, was destroyed by a fire started by lightning.
Iglesia de San Pío X, a church located in Todoque, Canary Islands, was destroyed by the 2021 Cumbre Vieja volcanic eruption on 26 September 2021.
Sweden
Tre Kronor, main residence of the Swedish Kings, destroyed by fire in 1697. Several important documents of the history of Sweden were lost in the fire.
Klarakvarteren, a part of Stockholm from the 17th century. It was demolished in the 1960–70.
The city of Norrköping was razed in 1719 by Russians. It was reconstructed with grid pattern streets and using the surviving Johannesborg fort as a quarry.
Switzerland
The city of Basel was devastated by the 1356 Basel earthquake.
Pfäfers Abbey was destroyed in 1665 by fire.
The city of Sion with Majoria and Tourbillon castles were destroyed by fire in 1788.
Disentis Abbey was destroyed by fire in 1799 with its library and archives.
The Kapellbrücke (Chapel Bridge) in Luzern (Lucerne) was substantially destroyed in 1993 by fire.
Ukraine
Antonov An-225 Mriya, Kyiv: Severely damaged in 2022 during the Battle of Antonov Airport, part of the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine. The aircraft's owner, defense contractor Ukroboronprom, has announced that following the invasion, they will attempt to rebuild the aircraft.
Babi Yar Holocaust Memorial Center, Kyiv: Damaged on 1 March 2022 during the Battle of Kyiv, part of the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine. The memorial complex, which was under construction at the time, suffered structural damage to a museum building, as well as damage to the adjacent cemetery; other intrinsic elements of the site, including the memorial's synagogue and menorah sculpture, were not damaged.
Brotherhood Monastery, Kyiv: Demolished by Soviet authorities in 1935.
Building of the Chernihiv Regional Youth Center, Chernihiv: Destroyed by a Russian air strike on 27 February 2022.
Church of the Tithes, Kyiv: The original 10th century church was destroyed by Mongol forces in the Siege of Kiev (1240). A new church was built on the site in the 19th century, but it was destroyed by Soviet authorities in 1935.
Dormition Cathedral, Kharkiv: Damaged in 2022 during the Battle of Kharkiv, part of the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine. Artwork and stained glass in the cathedral were damaged.
Great Suburb Synagogue, Lviv: Demolished by invading Nazi forces in 1941.
Golden Rose Synagogue, Lviv: Oldest synagogue in Ukraine, sacked in 1941 and demolished in 1942 by the Nazi occupation forces.
Ivankiv Historical and Local History Museum, Ivankiv: Destroyed on 27 February 2022 during the Battle of Ivankiv, part of the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine. The museum contained folk artwork, including paintings by Maria Prymachenko and textile works of Hanna Veres. The number of artworks by Prymachenko, Veres, and other artists which were destroyed or damaged is currently unknown.
Khreshchatyk, Kyiv: The main street of Kyiv, containing many historic buildings. It was heavily mined by retreating Soviet forces in 1941, and as a result most buildings were destroyed. Some buildings were restored after the war, but most were replaced with new structures in the style of Stalinist architecture.
Kuindzhi Art Museum, Mariupol: Destroyed on 21 March 2022 during the Siege of Mariupol, part of the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine. The museum was dedicated to the life and work of Ukrainian-born artist Arkhip Kuindzhi. Although the works by Kuindzhi held by the museum were reportedly removed from the building prior to its destruction, the whereabouts of the artwork are unknown. Additionally, the status of the remainder of the museum's collection, which included around 2,000 works by fellow Ukrainian artists Ivan Aivazovsky, Mykola Hlushchenko, Tetyana Yablonska, Mykhailo Derehus, and others, remains unknown.
St. Michael's Golden-Domed Monastery, Kyiv: Demolished by Soviet authorities from 1934 to 1936. Some frescoes and mosaics were removed and taken to museums in the Russian FSR before demolition, only a portion of which were returned when the cathedral was rebuilt in the 1990s.
St. Nicholas Military Cathedral, Kyiv: Demolished by Soviet authorities in 1934.
Slovo Building, Kharkiv: Damaged in 2022 during the Battle of Kharkiv, part of the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine.
Transfiguration Cathedral, Odesa: Severely damaged by a Russian air strike on 23 July 2023.
United Kingdom
13th–17th centuries
Dunwich, the historic capital of East Anglia, and a major port city of medieval England, has largely fallen into the sea due to gradual coastal erosion following two great storms in 1287. Eight churches present in the 13th century and 400 houses have been swept into the sea. A popular local legend says that at certain tides church bells can still be heard from beneath the waves.
Hastings Castle was originally built as a wooden motte and bailey castle in 1066, after William the Conqueror first landed in England, and was rebuilt as a stone fortified castle in 1070. It was dismantled on the orders of King John, who feared it being taken by French Dauphin Louis. It was then rebuilt and refortified by King Henry III around 1220 to 1225. In the South England flood of February 1287, the cliff supporting the castle's south wall collapsed due to a violent storm, causing a large portion of the wall to fall into the North Sea, then in 1337 and 1339 it was attacked by French troops. The destroyed remains of the castle were excavated in the 1820s when the sandstone cliff was cut back to make room for the construction of the neo-classica Pelham Arcade. It last suffered damage as a target for bombs during World War II.
The Dissolution of the Monasteries in the 1530s led to many monasteries, relics, and books being destroyed, such as Glastonbury Abbey, Fountains Abbey, Walsingham Priory, Waltham Abbey, Rievaulx Abbey and Furness Abbey. Some monastic churches survived in use as parish churches or cathedrals, as for example at Bath, Romsey and Gloucester, some monasteries were converted to houses, like Coombe Abbey and Lacock Abbey, some fell into ruin and some disappeared completely. In total around 900 monasteries were closed. In addition, the abolition of chantries in 1547 and the conversion to Protestantism led to iconoclastic destruction of artwork in many churches. For a complete list of dissolved monasteries, see List of monastic houses in England and List of monastic houses in Wales.
In Scotland, the Reformation happened later, in 1560, and the monks were generally not evicted, but merely left in their monasteries to die out. By the 1590s most monks had died, and in the early 17th century King James VI reconstructed the monastic estates as temporal lordships. The new owners then either destroyed the derelict monasteries or converted them to residential use.
In the English Civil War, many castles and stately homes were destroyed in sieges (an example being Old Wardour Castle) or slighted or demolished by the victorious Parliamentarians. This was done both to render them militarily untenable and as a symbolic destruction of the old order. Parliament could not afford to garrison al the many castles in England against Royalist insurgents, and an ungarrisoned castle could easily be used as a base by supporters of King Charles. This happened at Pontefract Castle, where the castle was left standing after the first civil war, was retaken by a party of Royalists, and had to be taken again in a lengthy siege. To prevent this recurring, the castle was thoroughly demolished. Raglan Castle was an example of a punitive demolition – the Marquis of Worcester had held out long after every other castle except Pendennis. As punishment his castle was ransacked and, in contrast to the preservation of that at Oxford, his library was deliberately burnt. Examples of destroyed or damaged castles include Corfe, Winchester, Pembroke, Aberystwyth, Helmsley, Bolton and Basing. The walls of the city of Coventry were also destroyed.
The Great Fire of London in 1666 destroyed much of the old city, including Old St Paul's Cathedral, 87 parish churches, 44 Company Halls, the Royal Exchange, the Custom House, and the Bridewell Palace.
The Palace of Whitehall, the main residence of the English and later British monarchs, was destroyed by fire in 1698.
18th–20th centuries
The Cotton library owned by Sir Robert Bruce Cotton was partly destroyed in a house fire in 1731, resulting in the loss of a number of important Late Antique and medieval manuscripts and serious damage to a number of others, including a copy of Magna Carta. The surviving works are now held by the British Library.
Arthur's O'on, a Roman temple or triumphal monument located near the Antonine Wall in Scotland, was demolished by a local landowner in 1743.
St Mary's Church in Reculver, an exemplar of Anglo-Saxon architecture and sculpture, was partially demolished in 1809.
The Palace of Westminster was almost destroyed by fire on 16 October 1834, and many documents about Britain's political history were lost. Only Westminster Hall, the crypt of St Stephen's Chapel and the Jewel Tower survived.
The Temple of the Sun, a Gothic folly in Kew Gardens designed by William Chambers in 1761, was destroyed when a nearby cedar tree fell on it in a storm in 1916. Strangely, Chambers had also planted the cedar earlier, in 1725.
The Crystal Palace in London was destroyed by fire on 30 November 1936.
St Michael's Church in Coventry was a 14th-century cathedral that was nearly destroyed by the German Luftwaffe during the Coventry Blitz of 14 November 1940. Only the tower, the spire, the outer wall, and the bronze effigy and tomb of its first bishop, Huyshe Yeatman-Biggs, survived. The ruins of this cathedral remain hallowed ground and are listed at Grade I.
Charles Church in Plymouth was entirely burned out by incendiary bombs dropped by the Luftwaffe on the nights of 21 and 22 March 1941. It has since been encircled by a roundabout and turned into "a memorial to those citizens of Plymouth who were killed in air-raids on the city in the 1939–45 war."
Coleshill House, a historic mansion in Oxfordshire (historically Berkshire) was destroyed in a fire in 1952, and many historic items within were lost. The ruins were demolished in 1958. This was part of a wave of country house demolitions in the aftermath of the Second World War and the decline of the aristocracy, which continued into the 1970s.
Several historic structures, such as the Euston Arch in London and the Royal Arch in Dundee, were demolished in the 1960s to make way for redeveloped infrastructure.
Urban renewal in many historic cities, like Exeter, Coventry and York, in the 1960s and 70s compounded the damage of the Blitz by destroying many historic buildings to create roads that were believed to be more suitable for traffic.
The Imperial Hotel, London, designed by Charles Fitzroy Doll and built from 1905 to 1911, was demolished in 1966–67.
York Minster was severely damaged by fire in 1984, believed to have been caused by a lightning strike on the south transept.
The Baltic Exchange at 24-28 St Mary Axe in the City of London, was destroyed by a bomb placed there by the Provisional IRA in 1992. The site is now occupied by The Gherkin and the Baltic Exchange Memorial Glass can be seen in the National Maritime Museum.
A major fire in 1992 caused extensive damage to Windsor Castle, the largest inhabited castle in the world.
21st century
The original Wembley Stadium was closed in October 2000 for redevelopment, and demolition commenced in December 2002, completing in 2003. The top of one of the twin towers was erected as a memorial in the park on the north side of Overton Close in the Saint Raphael's Estate.
The Carlton Tavern, an historic pub in Kilburn, London and the only building on its street to survive the Blitz during World War II, was demolished by its owner without prior permission in April 2015. The pub was subsequently rebuilt and re-opened following a community campaign and planning appeals.
Clandon Park House, a historic mansion in Surrey, was severely damaged by fire on 29 April 2015, leaving the house "essentially a shell" and destroying thousands of historic items, including one of the footballs kicked across no-man's land on the first day of the Battle of the Somme in 1916.
The Royal Clarence Hotel in Exeter, considered England's oldest hotel, was almost destroyed by fire on 28 October 2016.
The Mackintosh Building of the Glasgow School of Art was extensively damaged by fire in May 2014, including the destruction of the artistically significant Mackintosh library; but as restoration was completed and nearing reopening a far more devastating fire broke out on the night of 15 June 2018, destroying the building's interior. Alan Dunlop, the school's professor of architecture, said: "I can't see any restoration possible for the building itself. It looks destroyed."
The Beehive Mills, in Bolton, Lancashire, a Grade II Bolton listed building built in 1895, was demolished by agreement of the local authority in 2019 for the building of 121 houses.
The Crooked House, a historic 18th-century pub and former farmhouse in Staffordshire, was destroyed by fire in August 2023, and the ruins demolished.
Liverpool Maritime Mercantile City lost its designation as a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 2021 following the decision to build the new Everton Stadium. It is one of only three former World Heritage Sites.