Background
Mughal emperors and elites consciously used architecture as a way to publicly display their presence and power. The extensive architectural patronage of the Mughals was made possible by their considerable wealth, which exceeded that of other contemporary Muslim empires like the Ottomans and Safavids.
Mughal emperors and elites consciously used architecture as a way to publicly display their presence and power. The extensive architectural patronage of the Mughals was made possible by their considerable wealth, which exceeded that of other contemporary Muslim empires like the Ottomans and Safavids. In the Indian subcontinent, more monuments survive from the Mughal period than any other period. Major monuments of this time include mosques, mausoleums, palaces, gardens, and fortresses.
The Mughal dynasty's founder, Babur, was initially based in Kabul, present-day Afghanistan. After the expansion into the Indian subcontinent, the imperial capital was, depending on the period, in Agra (present-day India), Delhi, or Lahore (present-day Pakistan), along with other sites that served for short periods. In several cases, Mughal emperors built new imperial cities as their capitals, such as Fatehpur Sikri by Akbar and Shahjahanabad by Shah Jahan. These capitals contain some of the greatest displays of Mughal monumental architecture, but imperial patronage was also directed across various cities and rural sites throughout the empire.
Mughal architecture was derived from three main architectural traditions: local Indo-Islamic architecture, the architecture of Islamic Persia and Central Asia, and indigenous Hindu architecture. Because earlier Indo-Islamic architecture already borrowed from both Hindu and Islamic architectural styles, certain influences in Mughal architecture can be difficult to attribute to one source or the other. With regards to Hindu architecture, local Rajput palaces were likely a key influence.
Early Mughal architecture developed from existing Indo-Islamic architecture while following the model of Timurid architecture (based in Central Asia), due in part to the Timurid ancestry of Babur. By the late 16th century, a more distinctive Mughal tradition emerged based on the combination of these two sources.
Under the reign of Akbar (r. 1556–1605), the use of Hindu architectural elements was especially prolific, including in high-profile construction projects like Fatehpur Sikri. During his reign in particular, non-Muslims were present among the highest-ranking officials and were able to become patrons of architecture as well. The most notable example is Raja Man Singh, a Hindu amir who built both Hindu temples and Muslim mosques and shrines.
Under Akbar's successors, there was a shift towards more typically Islamic architectural designs. During the reign of Shah Jahan (r. 1628–1658), a "classical" Mughal style was consolidated and remained essentially in use until the end of the Mughal period. A certain level of stylistic consistency was achieved throughout the empire at this period thanks to the role of a central department of architects, similar to the imperial architects that existed in the Ottoman Empire.