Bronze age period
Period (5th–2nd Millennium BCE)
Early Harappan phase
Although the urban phase of Harappa has been dated back to 2600 BCE, excavation at Kalibangan from the early or proto-Harappan period already shows an urban development with fortification, grid layout of the city and drain system. The settlement consisted of a fortified city mostly made of mud-brick architecture but characterized by an appearance of fired bricks around 3000 BCE which was used to line the drains of the city.
Period (5th–2nd Millennium BCE)
Early Harappan phase
Although the urban phase of Harappa has been dated back to 2600 BCE, excavation at Kalibangan from the early or proto-Harappan period already shows an urban development with fortification, grid layout of the city and drain system. The settlement consisted of a fortified city mostly made of mud-brick architecture but characterized by an appearance of fired bricks around 3000 BCE which was used to line the drains of the city. Planned settlements from an early Harappan era with structures parallel to the streets which run perpendicular to each other with public drainage system has been uncovered at the site of Rakhigarhi, one of the biggest urbanized areas of the Indus valley civilization dating back to 4000–3200 BCE. Even earlier phase dated 4400–4200 BCE has marked the appearance of wedge-shaped mud bricks with rectangular houses.
English Bond and building material
While in contemporary Bronze Age cultures outside India sun-dried mud bricks were the dominant building material, the Indus Valley civilization preferred to use fired "terracotta" brick instead. A prominent feature of Harappan architecture was also the first use anywhere in the world of English bond in building with bricks. This type of bonding utilized alternate headers and stretchers which is a stronger method of construction. Clay was usually used as cementing material but where better strength was needed, such as for the drains, lime and gypsum mortar was preferred instead. In architecture such as the Great Bath, bitumen was used for waterproofing. The bricks were produced in a standardized ratio of 4:2:1, found throughout the Indus Valley civilization.
Larger buildings
The excavation at Banawali in present-day Haryana has also yielded an Apsidal plan which has been interpreted as a temple.
At Dholavira, possible funerary architecture was found surrounding a dried up lake and consists of tumuli, sometimes resembling hemispherical domes, constructed using mud bricks or stone slabs.
Domestic architecture
The domestic houses were made of bricks and usually flat roofed, the wooden doors were provided with hangings and a lock at the bottom. The houses were single or double storied. The windows were provided with lattice shutters for airflow and privacy and ledge to stop rainwater from entering the house. The houses were usually provided with bathing platform which were connected to the public drain through in house drain. Latrines were generally simple commode had a small drain leading outside to a second sump pot. The latrines and bathing platforms were located in a room attached to the outer wall. Kitchen were open air situated in a courtyard as well as closed rooms, hearths oval, circular and rectangular in shape were also used in the house, keyhole ovens with central pillars were used for roasting meat or baking breads.
Late Harappan period
After the collapse of the mature Harappan urban period, some cities still remained urban and inhabited.
Non-Harappan architecture
Balathal defense architecture, stone and mud brick residential structures of Ahar Banas, defensive wall is characterised by mud based core having stone revetments with rectangular bastion dated c. 2400–1800 BCE, Sanghol and Rupar of Bara culture are some of the non Harappan chalcolithic urban developments that took place in India as well.